   1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   A CHEERFUL TEMPER

   by Hans Christian Andersen

FROM my father I received the best inheritance, namely a "good

temper." "And who was my father?" That has nothing to do with the good

temper; but I will say he was lively, good-looking round, and fat;

he was both in appearance and character a complete contradiction to

his profession. "And pray what was his profession and his standing

in respectable society?" Well, perhaps, if in the beginning of a

book these were written and printed, many, when they read it, would

lay the book down and say, "It seems to me a very miserable title, I

don't like things of this sort." And yet my father was not a

skin-dresser nor an executioner; on the contrary, his employment

placed him at the head of the grandest people of the town, and it

was his place by right. He had to precede the bishop, and even the

princes of the blood; he always went first,- he was a hearse driver!

There, now, the truth is out. And I will own, that when people saw

my father perched up in front of the omnibus of death, dressed in

his long, wide, black cloak, and his black-edged, three-cornered hat

on his head, and then glanced at his round, jocund face, round as

the sun, they could not think much of sorrow or the grave. That face

said, "It is nothing, it will all end better than people think." So

I have inherited from him, not only my good temper, but a habit of

going often to the churchyard, which is good, when done in a proper

humor; and then also I take in the Intelligencer, just as he used to

do.

I am not very young, I have neither wife nor children, nor a

library, but, as I said, I read the Intelligencer, which is enough for

me; it is to me a delightful paper, and so it was to my father. It

is of great use, for it contains all that a man requires to know;

the names of the preachers at the church, and the new books which

are published; where houses, servants, clothes, and provisions may

be obtained. And then what a number of subscriptions to charities, and

what innocent verses! Persons seeking interviews and engagements,

all so plainly and naturally stated. Certainly, a man who takes in the

Intelligencer may live merrily and be buried contentedly, and by the

end of his life will have such a capital stock of paper that he can

lie on a soft bed of it, unless he prefers wood shavings for his

resting-place. The newspaper and the churchyard were always exciting

objects to me. My walks to the latter were like bathing-places to my

good humor. Every one can read the newspaper for himself, but come

with me to the churchyard while the sun shines and the trees are

green, and let us wander among the graves. Each of them is like a

closed book, with the back uppermost, on which we can read the title

of what the book contains, but nothing more. I had a great deal of

information from my father, and I have noticed a great deal myself.

I keep it in my diary, in which I write for my own use and pleasure

a history of all who lie here, and a few more beside.

Now we are in the churchyard. Here, behind the white iron

railings, once a rose-tree grew; it is gone now, but a little bit of

evergreen, from a neighboring grave, stretches out its green tendrils,

and makes some appearance; there rests a very unhappy man, and yet

while he lived he might be said to occupy a very good position. He had

enough to live upon, and something to spare; but owing to his

refined tastes the least thing in the world annoyed him. If he went to

a theatre of an evening, instead of enjoying himself he would be quite

annoyed if the machinist had put too strong a light into one side of

the moon, or if the representations of the sky hung over the scenes

when they ought to have hung behind them; or if a palm-tree was

introduced into a scene representing the Zoological Gardens of Berlin,

or a cactus in a view of Tyrol, or a beech-tree in the north of

Norway. As if these things were of any consequence! Why did he not

leave them alone? Who would trouble themselves about such trifles?

especially at a comedy, where every one is expected to be amused. Then

sometimes the public applauded too much, or too little, to please him.

"They are like wet wood," he would say, looking round to see what sort

of people were present, "this evening; nothing fires them." Then he

would vex and fret himself because they did not laugh at the right

time, or because they laughed in the wrong places; and so he fretted

and worried himself till at last the unhappy man fretted himself

into the grave.

Here rests a happy man, that is to say, a man of high birth and

position, which was very lucky for him, otherwise he would have been

scarcely worth notice. It is beautiful to observe how wisely nature

orders these things. He walked about in a coat embroidered all over,

and in the drawing-rooms of society looked just like one of those rich

pearl-embroidered bell-pulls, which are only made for show; and behind

them always hangs a good thick cord for use. This man also had a

stout, useful substitute behind him, who did duty for him, and

performed all his dirty work. And there are still, even now, these

serviceable cords behind other embroidered bell-ropes. It is all so

wisely arranged, that a man may well be in a good humor.

Here rests,- ah, it makes one feel mournful to think of him!-

but here rests a man who, during sixty-seven years, was never

remembered to have said a good thing; he lived only in the hope of

having a good idea. At last he felt convinced, in his own mind, that

he really had one, and was so delighted that he positively died of joy

at the thought of having at last caught an idea. Nobody got anything

by it; indeed, no one even heard what the good thing was. Now I can

imagine that this same idea may prevent him from resting quietly in

his grave; for suppose that to produce a good effect, it is

necessary to bring out his new idea at breakfast, and that he can only

make his appearance on earth at midnight, as ghosts are believed

generally to do; why then this good idea would not suit the hour,

and the man would have to carry it down again with him into the grave-

that must be a troubled grave.

The woman who lies here was so remarkably stingy, that during

her life she would get up in the night and mew, that her neighbors

might think she kept a cat. What a miser she was!

Here rests a young lady, of a good family, who would always make

her voice heard in society, and when she sang "Mi manca la voce,"*

it was the only true thing she ever said in her life.

* "I want a voice," or, "I have no voice."

Here lies a maiden of another description. She was engaged to be

married,- but, her story is one of every-day life; we will leave her

to rest in the grave.

Here rests a widow, who, with music in her tongue, carried gall in

her heart. She used to go round among the families near, and search

out their faults, upon which she preyed with all the envy and malice

of her nature. This is a family grave. The members of this family held

so firmly together in their opinions, that they would believe in no

other. If the newspapers, or even the whole world, said of a certain

subject, "It is so-and-so;" and a little schoolboy declared he had

learned quite differently, they would take his assertion as the only

true one, because he belonged to the family. And it is well known that

if the yard-cock belonging to this family happened to crow at

midnight, they would declare it was morning, although the watchman and

all the clocks in the town were proclaiming the hour of twelve at

night.

The great poet Goethe concludes his Faust with the words, "may

be continued;" so might our wanderings in the churchyard be continued.

I come here often, and if any of my friends, or those who are not my

friends, are too much for me, I go out and choose a plot of ground

in which to bury him or her. Then I bury them, as it were; there

they lie, dead and powerless, till they come back new and better

characters. Their lives and their deeds, looked at after my own

fashion, I write down in my diary, as every one ought to do. Then,

if any of our friends act absurdly, no one need to be vexed about

it. Let them bury the offenders out of sight, and keep their good

temper. They can also read the Intelligencer, which is a paper written

by the people, with their hands guided. When the time comes for the

history of my life, to be bound by the grave, then they will write

upon it as my epitaph-

 "The man with a cheerful temper."

And this is my story.

THE END

.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 A GREAT GRIEF

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THIS story really consists of two parts. The first part might be

left out, but it gives us a few particulars, and these are useful

We were staying in the country at a gentleman's seat, where it

happened that the master was absent for a few days. In the meantime,

there arrived from the next town a lady; she had a pug dog with her,

and came, she said, to dispose of shares in her tan-yard. She had

her papers with her, and we advised her to put them in an envelope,

and to write thereon the address of the proprietor of the estate,

"General War-Commissary Knight," &c.

She listened to us attentively, seized the pen, paused, and begged

us to repeat the direction slowly. We complied, and she wrote; but

in the midst of the "General War-" she struck fast, sighed deeply, and

said, "I am only a woman!" Her Puggie had seated itself on the

ground while she wrote, and growled; for the dog had come with her for

amusement and for the sake of its health; and then the bare floor

ought not to be offered to a visitor. His outward appearance was

characterized by a snub nose and a very fat back.

"He doesn't bite," said the lady; "he has no teeth. He is like one

of the family, faithful and grumpy; but the latter is my

grandchildren's fault, for they have teased him; they play at wedding,

and want to give him the part of the bridesmaid, and that's too much

for him, poor old fellow."

And she delivered her papers, and took Puggie upon her arm. And

this is the first part of the story which might have been left out.

PUGGIE DIED!! That's the second part.

It was about a week afterwards we arrived in the town, and put

up at the inn. Our windows looked into the tan-yard, which was divided

into two parts by a partition of planks; in one half were many skins

and hides, raw and tanned. Here was all the apparatus necessary to

carry on a tannery, and it belonged to the widow. Puggie had died in

the morning, and was to be buried in this part of the yard; the

grandchildren of the widow (that is, of the tanner's widow, for Puggie

had never been married) filled up the grave, and it was a beautiful

grave- it must have been quite pleasant to lie there.

The grave was bordered with pieces of flower-pots and strewn

over with sand; quite at the top they had stuck up half a beer bottle,

with the neck upwards, and that was not at all allegorical.

The children danced round the grave, and the eldest of the boys

among them, a practical youngster of seven years, made the proposition

that there should be an exhibition of Puggie's burial-place for all

who lived in the lane; the price of admission was to be a trouser

button, for every boy would be sure to have one, and each might also

give one for a little girl. This proposal was adopted by acclamation.

And all the children out of the lane- yes, even out of the

little lane at the back- flocked to the place, and each gave a button.

Many were noticed to go about on that afternoon with only one

suspender; but then they had seen Puggie's grave, and the sight was

worth much more.

But in front of the tan-yard, close to the entrance, stood a

little girl clothed in rags, very pretty to look at, with curly

hair, and eyes so blue and clear that it was a pleasure to look into

them. The child said not a word, nor did she cry; but each time the

little door was opened she gave a long, long look into the yard. She

had not a button- that she knew right well, and therefore she remained

standing sorrowfully outside, till all the others had seen the grave

and had gone away; then she sat down, held her little brown hands

before her eyes, and burst into tears; this girl alone had not seen

Puggie's grave. It was a grief as great to her as any grown person can

experience.

We saw this from above; and looked at from above, how many a grief

of our own and of others can make us smile! That is the story, and

whoever does not understand it may go and purchase a share in the

tan-yard from the window.

THE END

.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   A LEAF FROM HEAVEN

   by Hans Christian Andersen

HIGH up in the clear, pure air flew an angel, with a flowerplucked from the garden of heaven. As he was kissing the flower a verylittle leaf fell from it and sunk down into the soft earth in themiddle of a wood. It immediately took root, sprouted, and sent outshoots among the other plants.

"What a ridiculous little shoot!" said one. "No one will recognizeit; not even the thistle nor the stinging-nettle."

"It must be a kind of garden plant," said another; and so theysneered and despised the plant as a thing from a garden.

"Where are you coming?" said the tall thistles whose leaves wereall armed with thorns. "It is stupid nonsense to allow yourself toshoot out in this way; we are not here to support you."

Winter came, and the plant was covered with snow, but the snowglittered over it as if it had sunshine beneath as well as above.

When spring came, the plant appeared in full bloom: a morebeautiful object than any other plant in the forest. And now theprofessor of botany presented himself, one who could explain hisknowledge in black and white. He examined and tested the plant, but itdid not belong to his system of botany, nor could he possibly find outto what class it did belong. "It must be some degenerate species,"said he; "I do not know it, and it is not mentioned in any system."

"Not known in any system!" repeated the thistles and the nettles.

The large trees which grew round it saw the plant and heard theremarks, but they said not a word either good or bad, which is thewisest plan for those who are ignorant.

There passed through the forest a poor innocent girl; her heartwas pure, and her understanding increased by her faith. Her chiefinheritance had been an old Bible, which she read and valued. From itspages she heard the voice of God speaking to her, and telling her toremember what was said of Joseph's brethren when persons wished toinjure her. "They imagined evil in their hearts, but God turned itto good." If we suffer wrongfully, if we are misunderstood ordespised, we must think of Him who was pure and holy, and who prayedfor those who nailed Him to the cross, "Father forgive them, forthey know not what they do."

The girl stood still before the wonderful plant, for the greenleaves exhaled a sweet and refreshing fragrance, and the flowersglittered and sparkled in the sunshine like colored flames, and theharmony of sweet sounds lingered round them as if each concealedwithin itself a deep fount of melody, which thousands of years couldnot exhaust. With pious gratitude the girl looked upon this gloriouswork of God, and bent down over one of the branches, that she mightexamine the flower and inhale the sweet perfume. Then a light broke inon her mind, and her heart expanded. Gladly would she have plucked aflower, but she could not overcome her reluctance to break one off.She knew it would so soon fade; so she took only a single greenleaf, carried it home, and laid it in her Bible, where it remainedever green, fresh, and unfading. Between the pages of the Bible itstill lay when, a few weeks afterwards, that Bible was laid underthe young girl's head in her coffin. A holy calm rested on her face,as if the earthly remains bore the impress of the truth that she nowstood in the presence of God.

In the forest the wonderful plant still continued to bloom till itgrew and became almost a tree, and all the birds of passage bowedthemselves before it.

"That plant is a foreigner, no doubt," said the thistles and theburdocks. "We can never conduct ourselves like that in thiscountry." And the black forest snails actually spat at the flower.

Then came the swineherd; he was collecting thistles and shrubsto burn them for the ashes. He pulled up the wonderful plant, rootsand all, and placed it in his bundle. "This will be as useful as any,"he said; so the plant was carried away.

Not long after, the king of the country suffered from thedeepest melancholy. He was diligent and industrious, but employmentdid him no good. They read deep and learned books to him, and then thelightest and most trifling that could be found, but all to no purpose.Then they applied for advice to one of the wise men of the world,and he sent them a message to say that there was one remedy whichwould relieve and cure him, and that it was a plant of heavenly originwhich grew in the forest in the king's own dominions. The messengerdescribed the flower so that is appearance could not be mistaken.

Then said the swineherd, "I am afraid I carried this plant awayfrom the forest in my bundle, and it has been burnt to ashes long ago.But I did not know any better."

"You did not know, any better! Ignorance upon ignorance indeed!"

The poor swineherd took these words to heart, for they wereaddressed to him; he knew not that there were others who wereequally ignorant. Not even a leaf of the plant could be found. Therewas one, but it lay in the coffin of the dead; no one knew anythingabout it.

Then the king, in his melancholy, wandered out to the spot inthe wood. "Here is where the plant stood," he said; "it is a sacredplace." Then he ordered that the place should be surrounded with agolden railing, and a sentry stationed near it.

The botanical professor wrote a long treatise about the heavenlyplant, and for this he was loaded with gold, which improved theposition of himself and his family.

And this part is really the most pleasant part of the story. Forthe plant had disappeared, and the king remained as melancholy and sadas ever, but the sentry said he had always been so.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   A ROSE FROM HOMER'S GRAVE

   by Hans Christian Andersen

ALL the songs of the east speak of the love of the nightingale forthe rose in the silent starlight night. The winged songsterserenades the fragrant flowers.

Not far from Smyrna, where the merchant drives his loadedcamels, proudly arching their long necks as they journey beneath thelofty pines over holy ground, I saw a hedge of roses. Theturtle-dove flew among the branches of the tall trees, and as thesunbeams fell upon her wings, they glistened as if they weremother-of-pearl. On the rose-bush grew a flower, more beautiful thanthem all, and to her the nightingale sung of his woes; but the roseremained silent, not even a dewdrop lay like a tear of sympathy on herleaves. At last she bowed her head over a heap of stones, and said,"Here rests the greatest singer in the world; over his tomb will Ispread my fragrance, and on it I will let my leaves fall when thestorm scatters them. He who sung of Troy became earth, and from thatearth I have sprung. I, a rose from the grave of Homer, am too loftyto bloom for a nightingale." Then the nightingale sung himself todeath. A camel-driver came by, with his loaded camels and his blackslaves; his little son found the dead bird, and buried the lovelysongster in the grave of the great Homer, while the rose trembled inthe wind.

The evening came, and the rose wrapped her leaves more closelyround her, and dreamed: and this was her dream.

It was a fair sunshiny day; a crowd of strangers drew near who hadundertaken a pilgrimage to the grave of Homer. Among the strangers wasa minstrel from the north, the home of the clouds and the brilliantlights of the aurora borealis. He plucked the rose and placed it ina book, and carried it away into a distant part of the world, hisfatherland. The rose faded with grief, and lay between the leaves ofthe book, which he opened in his own home, saying, "Here is a rosefrom the grave of Homer."

Then the flower awoke from her dream, and trembled in the wind.A drop of dew fell from the leaves upon the singer's grave. The sunrose, and the flower bloomed more beautiful than ever. The day washot, and she was still in her own warm Asia. Then footstepsapproached, strangers, such as the rose had seen in her dream, cameby, and among them was a poet from the north; he plucked the rose,pressed a kiss upon her fresh mouth, and carried her away to thehome of the clouds and the northern lights. Like a mummy, the flowernow rests in his "Iliad," and, as in her dream, she hears him say,as he opens the book, "Here is a rose from the grave of Homer."

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

A STORY

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IN the garden all the apple-trees were in blossom. They hadhastened to bring forth flowers before they got green leaves, and inthe yard all the ducklings walked up and down, and the cat too: itbasked in the sun and licked the sunshine from its own paws. Andwhen one looked at the fields, how beautifully the corn stood andhow green it shone, without comparison! and there was a twittering anda fluttering of all the little birds, as if the day were a greatfestival; and so it was, for it was Sunday. All the bells wereringing, and all the people went to church, looking cheerful, anddressed in their best clothes. There was a look of cheerfulness oneverything. The day was so warm and beautiful that one might well havesaid: "God's kindness to us men is beyond all limits." But insidethe church the pastor stood in the pulpit, and spoke very loudly andangrily. He said that all men were wicked, and God would punish themfor their sins, and that the wicked, when they died, would be castinto hell, to burn for ever and ever. He spoke very excitedly,saying that their evil propensities would not be destroyed, norwould the fire be extinguished, and they should never find rest.That was terrible to hear, and he said it in such a tone ofconviction; he described hell to them as a miserable hole where allthe refuse of the world gathers. There was no air beside the hotburning sulphur flame, and there was no ground under their feet; they,the wicked ones, sank deeper and deeper, while eternal silencesurrounded them! It was dreadful to hear all that, for the preacherspoke from his heart, and all the people in the church were terrified.Meanwhile, the birds sang merrily outside, and the sun was shiningso beautifully warm, it seemed as though every little flower said:"God, Thy kindness towards us all is without limits." Indeed,outside it was not at all like the pastor's sermon.

The same evening, upon going to bed, the pastor noticed his wifesitting there quiet and pensive.

"What is the matter with you?" he asked her.

"Well, the matter with me is," she said, "that I cannot collect mythoughts, and am unable to grasp the meaning of what you said to-dayin church- that there are so many wicked people, and that theyshould burn eternally. Alas! eternally- how long! I am only a womanand a sinner before God, but I should not have the heart to let eventhe worst sinner burn for ever, and how could our Lord to do so, whois so infinitely good, and who knows how the wickedness comes fromwithout and within? No, I am unable to imagine that, although yousay so."

It was autumn; the trees dropped their leaves, the earnest andsevere pastor sat at the bedside of a dying person. A pious,faithful soul closed her eyes for ever; she was the pastor's wife.

..."If any one shall find rest in the grave and mercy before ourLord you shall certainly do so," said the pastor. He folded herhands and read a psalm over the dead woman.

She was buried; two large tears rolled over the cheeks of theearnest man, and in the parsonage it was empty and still, for itssun had set for ever. She had gone home.

It was night. A cold wind swept over the pastor's head; heopened his eyes, and it seemed to him as if the moon was shininginto his room. It was not so, however; there was a being standingbefore his bed, and looking like the ghost of his deceased wife. Shefixed her eyes upon him with such a kind and sad expression, just asif she wished to say something to him. The pastor raised himself inbed and stretched his arms towards her, saying, "Not even you can findeternal rest! You suffer, you best and most pious woman?"

The dead woman nodded her head as if to say "Yes," and put herhand on her breast.

"And can I not obtain rest in the grave for you?"

"Yes," was the answer.

"And how?"

"Give me one hair- only one single hair- from the head of thesinner for whom the fire shall never be extinguished, of the sinnerwhom God will condemn to eternal punishment in hell."

"Yes, one ought to be able to redeem you so easily, you pure,pious woman," he said.

"Follow me," said the dead woman. "It is thus granted to us. By myside you will be able to fly wherever your thoughts wish to go.Invisible to men, we shall penetrate into their most secretchambers; but with sure hand you must find out him who is destinedto eternal torture, and before the cock crows he must be found!" Asquickly as if carried by the winged thoughts they were in the greatcity, and from the walls the names of the deadly sins shone in flamingletters: pride, avarice, drunkenness, wantonness- in short, thewhole seven-coloured bow of sin.

"Yes, therein, as I believed, as I knew it," said the pastor, "areliving those who are abandoned to the eternal fire." And they werestanding before the magnificently illuminated gate; the broad stepswere adorned with carpets and flowers, and dance music was soundingthrough the festive halls. A footman dressed in silk and velvetstood with a large silver-mounted rod near the entrance.

"Our ball can compare favourably with the king's," he said, andturned with contempt towards the gazing crowd in the street. What hethought was sufficiently expressed in his features and movements:"Miserable beggars, who are looking in, you are nothing incomparison to me."

"Pride," said the dead woman; "do you see him?"

"The footman?" asked the pastor. "He is but a poor fool, and notdoomed to be tortured eternally by fire!"

"Only a fool!" It sounded through the whole house of pride: theywere all fools there.

Then they flew within the four naked walls of the miser. Lean as askeleton, trembling with cold, and hunger, the old man was clingingwith all his thoughts to his money. They saw him jump up feverishlyfrom his miserable couch and take a loose stone out of the wall; therelay gold coins in an old stocking. They saw him anxiously feeling overan old ragged coat in which pieces of gold were sewn, and his clammyfingers trembled.

"He is ill! That is madness- a joyless madness- besieged by fearand dreadful dreams!"

They quickly went away and came before the beds of thecriminals; these unfortunate people slept side by side, in longrows. Like a ferocious animal, one of them rose out of his sleep anduttered a horrible cry, and gave his comrade a violent dig in the ribswith his pointed elbow, and this one turned round in his sleep:

"Be quiet, monster- sleep! This happens every night!"

"Every night!" repeated the other. "Yes, every night he comesand tortures me! In my violence I have done this and that. I wasborn with an evil mind, which has brought me hither for the secondtime; but if I have done wrong I suffer punishment for it. Onething, however, I have not yet confessed. When I came out a littlewhile ago, and passed by the yard of my former master, evil thoughtsrose within me when I remembered this and that. I struck a match alittle bit on the wall; probably it came a little too close to thethatched roof. All burnt down- a great heat rose, such as sometimesovercomes me. I myself helped to rescue cattle and things, nothingalive burnt, except a flight of pigeons, which flew into the fire, andthe yard dog, of which I had not thought; one could hear him howlout of the fire, and this howling I still hear when I wish to sleep;and when I have fallen asleep, the great rough dog comes and placeshimself upon me, and howls, presses, and tortures me. Now listen towhat I tell you! You can snore; you are snoring the whole night, and Ihardly a quarter of an hour!" And the blood rose to the head of theexcited criminal; he threw himself upon his comrade, and beat him withhis clenced fist in the face.

"Wicked Matz has become mad again!" they said amongstthemselves. The other criminals seized him, wrestled with him, andbent him double, so that his head rested between his knees, and theytied him, so that the blood almost came out of his eyes and out of allhis pores.

"You are killing the unfortunate man," said the pastor, and ashe stretched out his hand to protect him who already suffered toomuch, the scene changed. They flew through rich halls and wretchedhovels; wantonness and envy, all the deadly sins, passed beforethem. An angel of justice read their crimes and their defence; thelatter was not a brilliant one, but it was read before God, Whoreads the heart, Who knows everything, the wickedness that comesfrom within and from without, Who is mercy and love personified. Thepastor's hand trembled; he dared not stretch it out, he did notventure to pull a hair out of the sinner's head. And tears gushed fromhis eyes like a stream of mercy and love, the cooling waters ofwhich extinguished the eternal fire of hell.

Just then the cock crowed.

"Father of all mercy, grant Thou to her the peace that I wasunable to procure for her!"

"I have it now!" said the dead woman. "It was your hard words,your despair of mankind, your gloomy belief in God and His creation,which drove me to you. Learn to know mankind! Even in the wicked onelives a part of God- and this extinguishes and conquers the flame ofhell!"

The pastor felt a kiss on his lips; a gleam of light surroundedhim- God's bright sun shone into the room, and his wife, alive,sweet and full of love, awoke him from a dream which God had sent him!

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

  A STORY FROM THE SAND-HILLS

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THIS story is from the sand-dunes or sand-hills of Jutland, but itdoes not begin there in the North, but far away in the South, inSpain. The wide sea is the highroad from nation to nation; journeyin thought; then, to sunny Spain. It is warm and beautiful there;the fiery pomegranate flowers peep from among dark laurels; a coolrefreshing breeze from the mountains blows over the orange gardens,over the Moorish halls with their golden cupolas and coloured walls.Children go through the streets in procession with candles andwaving banners, and the sky, lofty and clear with its glitteringstars, rises above them. Sounds of singing and castanets can be heard,and youths and maidens dance upon the flowering acacia trees, whileeven the beggar sits upon a block of marble, refreshing himself with ajuicy melon, and dreamily enjoying life. It all seems like a beautifuldream.

Here dwelt a newly married couple who completely gave themselvesup to the charm of life; indeed they possessed every good thing theycould desire- health and happiness, riches and honour.

We are as happy as human beings can be," said the young couplefrom the depths of their hearts. They had indeed only one stephigher to mount on the ladder of happiness- they hoped that Godwould give them a child, a son like them in form and spirit. The happylittle one was to be welcomed with rejoicing, to be cared for withlove and tenderness, and enjoy every advantage of wealth and luxurythat a rich and influential family can give. So the days went bylike a joyous festival.

"Life is a gracious gift from God, almost too great a gift forus to appreciate!" said the young wife. "Yet they say that fulnessof joy for ever and ever can only be found in the future life. Icannot realise it!"

"The thought arises, perhaps, from the arrogance of men," said thehusband. "It seems a great pride to believe that we shall live forever, that we shall be as gods! Were not these the words of theserpent, the father of lies?"

"Surely you do not doubt the existence of a future life?"exclaimed the young wife. It seemed as if one of the first shadowspassed over her sunny thoughts.

"Faith realises it, and the priests tell us so," replied herhusband; "but amid all my happiness I feel that it is arrogant todemand a continuation of it- another life after this. Has not somuch been given us in this world that we ought to be, we must be,contented with it?"

"Yes, it has been given to us," said the young wife, "but thislife is nothing more than one long scene of trial and hardship to manythousands. How many have been cast into this world only to endurepoverty, shame, illness, and misfortune? If there were no future life,everything here would be too unequally divided, and God would not bethe personification of justice."

"The beggar there," said her husband, "has joys of his own whichseem to him great, and cause him as much pleasure as a king would findin the magnificence of his palace. And then do you not think thatthe beast of burden, which suffers blows and hunger, and worksitself to death, suffers just as much from its miserable fate? Thedumb creature might demand a future life also, and declare the lawunjust that excludes it from the advantages of the higher creation."

"Christ said: 'In my father's house are many mansions,'" sheanswered. "Heaven is as boundless as the love of our Creator; the dumbanimal is also His creature, and I firmly believe that no life will belost, but each will receive as much happiness as he can enjoy, whichwill be sufficient for him."

"This world is sufficient for me," said the husband, throwinghis arm round his beautiful, sweet-tempered wife. He sat by her sideon the open balcony, smoking a cigarette in the cool air, which wasloaded with the sweet scent of carnations and orange blossoms.Sounds of music and the clatter of castanets came from the roadbeneath, the stars shone above then, and two eyes full of affection-those of his wife- looked upon him with the expression of undyinglove. "Such a moment," he said, "makes it worth while to be born, todie, and to be annihilated!" He smiled- the young wife raised her handin gentle reproof, and the shadow passed away from her mind, andthey were happy- quite happy.

Everything seemed to work together for their good. They advancedin honour, in prosperity, and in happiness. A change came certainly,but it was only a change of place and not of circumstances.

The young man was sent by his Sovereign as ambassador to theRussian Court. This was an office of high dignity, but his birth andhis acquirements entitled him to the honour. He possessed a largefortune, and his wife had brought him wealth equal to his own, for shewas the daughter of a rich and respected merchant. One of thismerchant's largest and finest ships was to be sent that year toStockholm, and it was arranged that the dear young couple, thedaughter and the son-in-law, should travel in it to St. Petersburg.All the arrangements on board were princely and silk and luxury onevery side.

In an old war song, called "The King of England's Son," it says:

 "Farewell, he said, and sailed away.

  And many recollect that day.

  The ropes were of silk, the anchor of gold,

  And everywhere riches and wealth untold."

These words would aptly describe the vessel from Spain, for herewas the same luxury, and the same parting thought naturally arose:

 "God grant that we once more may meet

  In sweet unclouded peace and joy."

There was a favourable wind blowing as they left the Spanishcoast, and it would be but a short journey, for they hoped to reachtheir destination in a few weeks; but when they came out upon the wideocean the wind dropped, the sea became smooth and shining, and thestars shone brightly. Many festive evenings were spent on board. Atlast the travellers began to wish for wind, for a favourable breeze;but their wish was useless- not a breath of air stirred, or if itdid arise it was contrary. Weeks passed by in this way, two wholemonths, and then at length a fair wind blew from the south-west. Theship sailed on the high seas between Scotland and Jutland; then thewind increased, just as it did in the old song of "The King ofEngland's Son."

"'Mid storm and wind, and pelting hail,

  Their efforts were of no avail.

  The golden anchor forth they threw;

  Towards Denmark the west wind blew."

This all happened a long time ago; King Christian VII, who saton the Danish throne, was still a young man. Much has happened sincethen, much has altered or been changed. Sea and moorland have beenturned into green meadows, stretches of heather have become arableland, and in the shelter of the peasant's cottages, apple-trees androse-bushes grow, though they certainly require much care, as thesharp west wind blows upon them. In West Jutland one may go back inthought to old times, farther back than the days when Christian VIIruled. The purple heather still extends for miles, with its barrowsand aerial spectacles, intersected with sandy uneven roads, just as itdid then; towards the west, where broad streams run into the bays, aremarshes and meadows encircled by lofty, sandy hills, which, like achain of Alps, raise their pointed summits near the sea; they are onlybroken by high ridges of clay, from which the sea, year by year, bitesout great mouthfuls, so that the overhanging banks fall down as ifby the shock of an earthquake. Thus it is there today and thus itwas long ago, when the happy pair were sailing in the beautiful ship.

It was a Sunday, towards the end of September; the sun wasshining, and the chiming of the church bells in the Bay of Nissumwas carried along by the breeze like a chain of sounds. The churchesthere are almost entirely built of hewn blocks of stone, each like apiece of rock. The North Sea might foam over them and they would notbe disturbed. Nearly all of them are without steeples, and the bellsare hung outside between two beams. The service was over, and thecongregation passed out into the churchyard, where not a tree orbush was to be seen; no flowers were planted there, and they had notplaced a single wreath upon any of the graves. It is just the samenow. Rough mounds show where the dead have been buried, and rankgrass, tossed by the wind, grows thickly over the whole churchyard;here and there a grave has a sort of monument, a block of half-decayedwood, rudely cut in the shape of a coffin; the blocks are brought fromthe forest of West Jutland, but the forest is the sea itself, andthe inhabitants find beams, and planks, and fragments which thewaves have cast upon the beach. One of these blocks had been placed byloving hands on a child's grave, and one of the women who had come outof the church walked up to it; she stood there, her eyes resting onthe weather-beaten memorial, and a few moments afterwards herhusband joined her. They were both silent, but he took her hand, andthey walked together across the purple heath, over moor and meadowtowards the sandhills. For a long time they went on without speaking.

"It was a good sermon to-day," the man said at last. "If we hadnot God to trust in, we should have nothing."

"Yes," replied the woman, "He sends joy and sorrow, and He has aright to send them. To-morrow our little son would have been fiveyears old if we had been permitted to keep him."

"It is no use fretting, wife," said the man. "The boy is wellprovided for. He is where we hope and pray to go to."

They said nothing more, but went out towards their houses amongthe sand-hills. All at once, in front of one of the houses where thesea grass did not keep the sand down with its twining roots, whatseemed to be a column of smoke rose up. A gust of wind rushedbetween the hills, hurling the particles of sand high into the air;another gust, and the strings of fish hung up to dry flapped andbeat violently against the walls of the cottage; then everything wasquiet once more, and the sun shone with renewed heat.

The man and his wife went into the cottage. They had soon takenoff their Sunday clothes and come out again, hurrying over the duneswhich stood there like great waves of sand suddenly arrested intheir course, while the sandweeds and dune grass with its bluishstalks spread a changing colour over them. A few neighbours alsocame out, and helped each other to draw the boats higher up on thebeach. The wind now blew more keenly, it was chilly and cold, and whenthey went back over the sand-hills, sand and little sharp stonesblew into their faces. The waves rose high, crested with white foam,and the wind cut off their crests, scattering the foam far and wide.

Evening came; there was a swelling roar in the air, a wailing ormoaning like the voices of despairing spirits, that sounded abovethe thunder of the waves. The fisherman's little cottage was on thevery margin, and the sand rattled against the window panes; everynow and then a violent gust of wind shook the house to its foundation.It was dark, but about midnight the moon would rise. Later on theair became clearer, but the storm swept over the perturbed sea withundiminished fury; the fisher folks had long since gone to bed, but insuch weather there was no chance of closing an eye. Presently therewas a tapping at the window; the door was opened, and a voice said:

"There's a large ship stranded on the farthest reef."

In a moment the fisher people sprung from their beds and hastilydressed themselves. The moon had risen, and it was light enough tomake the surrounding objects visible to those who could open theireyes in the blinding clouds of sand; the violence of the wind wasterrible, and it was only possible to pass among the sand-hills if onecrept forward between the gusts; the salt spray flew up from the sealike down, and the ocean foamed like a roaring cataract towards thebeach. Only a practised eye could discern the vessel out in theoffing; she was a fine brig, and the waves now lifted her over thereef, three or four cables' length out of the usual channel. She drovetowards the shore, struck on the second reef, and remained fixed.

It was impossible to render assistance; the sea rushed in upon thevessel, making a clean breach over her. Those on shore thought theyheard cries for help from those on board, and could plainlydistinguish the busy but useless efforts made by the stranded sailors.Now a wave came rolling onward. It fell with enormous force on thebowsprit, tearing it from the vessel, and the stern was lifted highabove the water. Two people were seen to embrace and plunge togetherinto the sea, and the next moment one of the largest waves that rolledtowards the sand-hills threw a body on the beach. It was a woman;the sailors said that she was quite dead, but the women thought theysaw signs of life in her, so the stranger was carried across thesand-hills to the fisherman's cottage. How beautiful and fair she was!She must be a great lady, they said.

They laid her upon the humble bed; there was not a yard of linenon it, only a woollen coverlet to keep the occupant warm.

Life returned to her, but she was delirious, and knew nothing ofwhat had happened or where she was; and it was better so, foreverything she loved and valued lay buried in the sea. The samething happened to her ship as to the one spoken of in the song about"The King of England's Son."

  "Alas! how terrible to see

   The gallant bark sink rapidly."

Fragments of the wreck and pieces of wood were washed ashore; theywere all that remained of the vessel. The wind still blew violently onthe coast.

For a few moments the strange lady seemed to rest; but she awokein pain, and uttered cries of anguish and fear. She opened herwonderfully beautiful eyes, and spoke a few words, but nobodyunderstood her.- And lo! as a reward for the sorrow and sufferingshe had undergone, she held in her arms a new-born babe. The childthat was to have rested upon a magnificent couch, draped with silkencurtains, in a luxurious home; it was to have been welcomed with joyto a life rich in all the good things of this world; and now Heavenhad ordained that it should be born in this humble retreat, that itshould not even receive a kiss from its mother, for when thefisherman's wife laid the child upon the mother's bosom, it restedon a heart that beat no more- she was dead.

The child that was to have been reared amid wealth and luxurywas cast into the world, washed by the sea among the sand-hills toshare the fate and hardships of the poor.

Here we are reminded again of the song about "The King ofEngland's Son," for in it mention is made of the custom prevalent atthe time, when knights and squires plundered those who had beensaved from shipwreck. The ship had stranded some distance south ofNissum Bay, and the cruel, inhuman days, when, as we have just said,the inhabitants of Jutland treated the shipwrecked people so crudelywere past, long ago. Affectionate sympathy and self-sacrifice forthe unfortunate existed then, just as it does in our own time inmany a bright example. The dying mother and the unfortunate childwould have found kindness and help wherever they had been cast bythe winds, but nowhere would it have been more sincere than in thecottage of the poor fisherman's wife, who had stood, only the daybefore, beside her child's grave, who would have been five years oldthat day if God had spared it to her.

No one knew who the dead stranger was, they could not even forma conjecture; the fragments of wreckage gave no clue to the matter.

No tidings reached Spain of the fate of the daughter andson-in-law. They did not arrive at their destination, and violentstorms had raged during the past weeks. At last the verdict was given:"Foundered at sea- all lost." But in the fisherman's cottage among thesand-hills near Hunsby, there lived a little scion of the rich Spanishfamily.

Where Heaven sends food for two, a third can manage to find ameal, and in the depth of the sea there is many a dish of fish for thehungry.

They called the boy Jurgen.

"It must certainly be a Jewish child, its skin is so dark," thepeople said.

"It might be an Italian or a Spaniard," remarked the clergyman.

But to the fisherman's wife these nations seemed all the same, andshe consoled herself with the thought that the child was baptized as aChristian.

The boy throve; the noble blood in his veins was warm, and hebecame strong on his homely fare. He grew apace in the humble cottage,and the Danish dialect spoken by the West Jutes became his language.The pomegranate seed from Spain became a hardy plant on the coast ofWest Jutland. Thus may circumstances alter the course of a man's life!To this home he clung with deep-rooted affection; he was to experiencecold and hunger, and the misfortunes and hardships that surround thepoor; but he also tasted of their joys.

Childhood has bright days for every one, and the memory of themshines through the whole after-life. The boy had many sources ofpleasure and enjoyment; the coast for miles and miles was full ofplaythings, for it was a mosaic of pebbles, some red as coral oryellow as amber, and others again white and rounded like birds' eggsand smoothed and prepared by the sea. Even the bleached fishes'skeletons, the water plants dried by the wind, and seaweed, whiteand shining long linen-like bands waving between the stones- all theseseemed made to give pleasure and occupation for the boy's thoughts,and he had an intelligent mind; many great talents lay dormant in him.How readily he remembered stories and songs that he heard, and howdexterous he was with his fingers! With stones and mussel-shells hecould put together pictures and ships with which one could decoratethe room; and he could make wonderful things from a stick, hisfoster-mother said, although he was still so young and little. Hehad a sweet voice, and every melody seemed to flow naturally fromhis lips. And in his heart were hidden chords, which might havesounded far out into the world if he had been placed anywhere elsethan in the fisherman's hut by the North Sea.

One day another ship was wrecked on the coast, and among otherthings a chest filled with valuable flower bulbs was washed ashore.Some were put into saucepans and cooked, for they were thought to befit to eat, and others lay and shrivelled in the sand- they did notaccomplish their purpose, or unfold their magnificent colours. WouldJurgen fare better? The flower bulbs had soon played their part, buthe had years of apprenticeship before him. Neither he nor hisfriends noticed in what a monotonous, uniform way one day followedanother, for there was always plenty to do and see. The ocean itselfwas a great lesson-book, and it unfolded a new leaf each day of calmor storm- the crested wave or the smooth surface.

The visits to the church were festive occasions, but among thefisherman's house one was especially looked forward to; this was, infact, the visit of the brother of Jurgen's foster-mother, theeel-breeder from Fjaltring, near Bovbjerg. He came twice a year in acart, painted red with blue and white tulips upon it, and full ofeels; it was covered and locked like a box, two dun oxen drew it,and Jurgen was allowed to guide them.

The eel-breeder was a witty fellow, a merry guest, and brought ameasure of brandy with him. They all received a small glassful or acupful if there were not enough glasses; even Jurgen had about athimbleful, that he might digest the fat eel, as the eel-breeder said;he always told one story over and over again, and if his hearerslaughed he would immediately repeat it to them. Jurgen while still aboy, and also when he was older, used phrases from the eel-breeder'sstory on various occasions, so it will be as well for us to listento it. It runs thus:

"The eels went into the bay, and the young ones begged leave to goa little farther out. 'Don't go too far,' said their mother; 'the uglyeel-spearer might come and snap you all up.' But they went too far,and of eight daughters only three came back to the mother, and thesewept and said, 'We only went a little way out, and the uglyeel-spearer came immediately and stabbed five of our sisters todeath.' 'They'll come back again,' said the mother eel. 'Oh, no,'exclaimed the daughters, 'for he skinned them, cut them in two, andfried them.' 'Oh, they'll come back again,' the mother eelpersisted. 'No,' replied the daughters, 'for he ate them up.' 'They'llcome back again,' repeated the mother eel. 'But he drank brandyafter them,' said the daughters. 'Ah, then they'll never come back,'said the mother, and she burst out crying, 'it's the brandy thatburies the eels.'"

"And therefore," said the eel-breeder in conclusion, "it is alwaysthe proper thing to drink brandy after eating eels."

This story was the tinsel thread, the most humorous recollectionof Jurgen's life. He also wanted to go a little way farther out and upthe bay- that is to say, out into the world in a ship- but hismother said, like the eel-breeder, "There are so many bad people-eel spearers!" He wished to go a little way past the sand-hills, outinto the dunes, and at last he did: four happy days, the brightestof his childhood, fell to his lot, and the whole beauty andsplendour of Jutland, all the happiness and sunshine of his home, wereconcentrated in these. He went to a festival, but it was a burialfeast.

A rich relation of the fisherman's family had died; the farm wassituated far eastward in the country and a little towards the north.Jurgen's foster parents went there, and he also went with them fromthe dunes, over heath and moor, where the Skjaerumaa takes itscourse through green meadows and contains many eels; mother eelslive there with their daughters, who are caught and eaten up by wickedpeople. But do not men sometimes act quite as cruelly towards theirown fellow-men? Was not the knight Sir Bugge murdered by wickedpeople? And though he was well spoken of, did he not also wish to killthe architect who built the castle for him, with its thick walls andtower, at the point where the Skjaerumaa falls into the bay? Jurgenand his parents now stood there; the wall and the ramparts stillremained, and red crumbling fragments lay scattered around. Here itwas that Sir Bugge, after the architect had left him, said to one ofhis men, "Go after him and say, 'Master, the tower shakes.' If heturns round, kill him and take away the money I paid him, but if hedoes not turn round let him go in peace." The man did as he wastold; the architect did not turn round, but called back "The towerdoes not shake in the least, but one day a man will come from the westin a blue cloak- he will cause it to shake!" And so indeed it happeneda hundred years later, for the North Sea broke in and cast down thetower; but Predbjorn Gyldenstjerne, the man who then possessed thecastle, built a new castle higher up at the end of the meadow, andthat one is standing to this day, and is called Norre-Vosborg.

Jurgen and his foster parents went past this castle. They had toldhim its story during the long winter evenings, and now he saw thestately edifice, with its double moat, and trees and bushes; the wall,covered with ferns, rose within the moat, but the lofty lime-treeswere the most beautiful of all; they grew up to the highest windows,and the air was full of their sweet fragrance. In a north-westcorner of the garden stood a great bush full of blossom, like wintersnow amid the summer's green; it was a juniper bush, the first thatJurgen had ever seen in bloom. He never forgot it, nor the lime-trees;the child's soul treasured up these memories of beauty and fragranceto gladden the old man.

From Norre-Vosborg, where the juniper blossomed, the journeybecame more pleasant, for they met some other people who were alsogoing to the funeral and were riding in waggons. Our travellers had tosit all together on a little box at the back of the waggon, but eventhis, they thought, was better than walking. So they continued theirjourney across the rugged heath. The oxen which drew the waggonstopped every now and then, where a patch of fresh grass appeared amidthe heather. The sun shone with considerable heat, and it waswonderful to behold how in the far distance something like smokeseemed to be rising; yet this smoke was clearer than the air; it wastransparent, and looked like rays of light rolling and dancing afarover the heath.

"That is Lokeman driving his sheep," said some one.

And this was enough to excite Jurgen's imagination. He felt asif they were now about to enter fairyland, though everything was stillreal. How quiet it was! The heath stretched far and wide around themlike a beautiful carpet. The heather was in blossom, and thejuniper-bushes and fresh oak saplings rose like bouquets from theearth. An inviting place for a frolic, if it had not been for thenumber of poisonous adders of which the travellers spoke; they alsomentioned that the place had formerly been infested with wolves, andthat the district was still called Wolfsborg for this reason. Theold man who was driving the oxen told them that in the lifetime of hisfather the horses had many a hard battle with the wild beasts thatwere now exterminated. One morning, when he himself had gone out tobring in the horses, he found one of them standing with its forefeeton a wolf it had killed, but the savage animal had torn andlacerated the brave horse's legs.

The journey over the heath and the deep sand was only tooquickly at an end. They stopped before the house of mourning, wherethey found plenty of guests within and without. Waggon after waggonstood side by side, while the horses and oxen had been turned out tograze on the scanty pasture. Great sand-hills like those at home bythe North Sea rose behind the house and extended far and wide. How hadthey come here, so many miles inland? They were as large and high asthose on the coast, and the wind had carried them there; there wasalso a legend attached to them.

Psalms were sung, and a few of the old people shed tears; withthis exception, the guests were cheerful enough, it seemed toJurgen, and there was plenty to eat and drink. There were eels ofthe fattest, requiring brandy to bury them, as the eel-breeder said;and certainly they did not forget to carry out his maxim here.

Jurgen went in and out the house; and on the third day he feltas much at home as he did in the fisherman's cottage among thesand-hills, where he had passed his early days. Here on the heath wereriches unknown to him until now; for flowers, blackberries, andbilberries were to be found in profusion, so large and sweet that whenthey were crushed beneath the tread of passers-by the heather wasstained with their red juice. Here was a barrow and yonder another.Then columns of smoke rose into the still air; it was a heath fire,they told him- how brightly it blazed in the dark evening!

The fourth day came, and the funeral festivities were at an end;they were to go back from the land-dunes to the sand-dunes.

"Ours are better," said the old fisherman, Jurgen's foster-father;"these have no strength."

And they spoke of the way in which the sand-dunes had come inland,and it seemed very easy to understand. This is how they explained it:

A dead body had been found on the coast, and the peasants buriedit in the churchyard. From that time the sand began to fly about andthe sea broke in with violence. A wise man in the district advisedthem to open the grave and see if the buried man was not lying suckinghis thumb, for if so he must be a sailor, and the sea would not restuntil it had got him back. The grave was opened, and he really wasfound with his thumb in his mouth. So they laid him upon a cart, andharnessed two oxen to it; and the oxen ran off with the sailor overheath and moor to the ocean, as if they had been stung by an adder.Then the sand ceased to fly inland, but the hills that had beenpiled up still remained.

All this Jurgen listened to and treasured up in his memory ofthe happiest days of his childhood- the days of the burial feast.

How delightful it was to see fresh places and to mix withstrangers! And he was to go still farther, for he was not yet fourteenyears old when he went out in a ship to see the world. Heencountered bad weather, heavy seas, unkindness, and hard men- suchwere his experiences, for he became ship-boy. Cold nights, bad living,and blows had to be endured; then he felt his noble Spanish blood boilwithin him, and bitter, angry, words rose to his lips, but he gulpedthem down; it was better, although he felt as the eel must feel whenit is skinned, cut up, and put into the frying-pan.

"I shall get over it," said a voice within him.

He saw the Spanish coast, the native land of his parents. Heeven saw the town where they had lived in joy and prosperity, but heknew nothing of his home or his relations, and his relations knew justas little about him.

The poor ship boy was not permitted to land, but on the last dayof their stay he managed to get ashore. There were several purchasesto be made, and he was sent to carry them on board.

Jurgen stood there in his shabby clothes which looked as if theyhad been washed in the ditch and dried in the chimney; he, who hadalways dwelt among the sand-hills, now saw a great city for thefirst time. How lofty the houses seemed, and what a number of peoplethere were in the streets! some pushing this way, some that- a perfectmaelstrom of citizens and peasants, monks and soldiers- the jinglingof bells on the trappings of asses and mules, the chiming of churchbells, calling, shouting, hammering and knocking- all going on atonce. Every trade was located in the basement of the houses or inthe side thoroughfares; and the sun shone with such heat, and theair was so close, that one seemed to be in an oven full of beetles,cockchafers, bees and flies, all humming and buzzing together.Jurgen scarcely knew where he was or which way he went. Then he sawjust in front of him the great doorway of a cathedral; the lights weregleaming in the dark aisles, and the fragrance of incense was waftedtowards him. Even the poorest beggar ventured up the steps into thesanctuary. Jurgen followed the sailor he was with into the church, andstood in the sacred edifice. Coloured pictures gleamed from theirgolden background, and on the altar stood the figure of the Virginwith the child Jesus, surrounded by lights and flowers; priests infestive robes were chanting, and choir boys in dazzling attire swungsilver censers. What splendour and magnificence he saw there! Itstreamed in upon his soul and overpowered him: the church and thefaith of his parents surrounded him, and touched a chord in hisheart that caused his eyes to overflow with tears.

They went from the church to the market-place. Here a quantityof provisions were given him to carry. The way to the harbour waslong; and weary and overcome with various emotions, he rested for afew moments before a splendid house, with marble pillars, statues, andbroad steps. Here he rested his burden against the wall. Then a porterin livery came out, lifted up a silver-headed cane, and drove himaway- him, the grandson of that house. But no one knew that, and hejust as little as any one. Then he went on board again, and oncemore encountered rough words and blows, much work and little sleep-such was his experience of life. They say it is good to suffer inone's young days, if age brings something to make up for it.

His period of service on board the ship came to an end, and thevessel lay once more at Ringkjobing in Jutland. He came ashore, andwent home to the sand-dunes near Hunsby; but his foster-mother haddied during his absence.

A hard winter followed this summer. Snow-storms swept over landand sea, and there was difficulty in getting from one place toanother. How unequally things are distributed in this world! Herethere was bitter cold and snow-storms, while in Spain there wasburning sunshine and oppressive heat. Yet, when a clear frosty daycame, and Jurgen saw the swans flying in numbers from the seatowards the land, across to Norre-Vosborg, it seemed to him thatpeople could breathe more freely here; the summer also in this part ofthe world was splendid. In imagination he saw the heath blossom andbecome purple with rich juicy berries, and the elder-bushes andlime-trees at Norre Vosborg in flower. He made up his mind to go thereagain.

Spring came, and the fishing began. Jurgen was now an activehelper in this, for he had grown during the last year, and was quickat work. He was full of life, and knew how to swim, to tread water,and to turn over and tumble in the strong tide. They often warnedhim to beware of the sharks, which seize the best swimmer, draw himdown, and devour him; but such was not to be Jurgen's fate.

At a neighbour's house in the dunes there was a boy namedMartin, with whom Jurgen was on very friendly terms, and they bothtook service in the same ship to Norway, and also went together toHolland. They never had a quarrel, but a person can be easilyexcited to quarrel when he is naturally hot tempered, for he oftenshows it in many ways; and this is just what Jurgen did one day whenthey fell out about the merest trifle. They were sitting behind thecabin door, eating from a delft plate, which they had placed betweenthem. Jurgen held his pocket-knife in his hand and raised it towardsMartin, and at the same time became ashy pale, and his eyes had anugly look. Martin only said, "Ah! ah! you are one of that sort, areyou? Fond of using the knife!"

The words were scarcely spoken, when Jurgen's hand sank down. Hedid not answer a syllable, but went on eating, and afterwards returnedto his work. When they were resting again he walked up to Martin andsaid:

"Hit me in the face! I deserve it. But sometimes I feel as if Ihad a pot in me that boils over."

"There, let the thing rest," replied Martin.

And after that they were almost better friends than ever; whenafterwards they returned to the dunes and began telling theiradventures, this was told among the rest. Martin said that Jurgenwas certainly passionate, but a good fellow after all.

They were both young and healthy, well-grown and strong; butJurgen was the cleverer of the two.

In Norway the peasants go into the mountains and take the cattlethere to find pasture. On the west coast of Jutland huts have beenerected among the sand-hills; they are built of pieces of wreck, andthatched with turf and heather; there are sleeping places round thewalls, and here the fishermen live and sleep during the earlyspring. Every fisherman has a female helper, or manager as she iscalled, who baits his hooks, prepares warm beer for him when hecomes ashore, and gets the dinner cooked and ready for him by the timehe comes back to the hut tired and hungry. Besides this the managersbring up the fish from the boats, cut them open, prepare them, andhave generally a great deal to do.

Jurgen, his father, and several other fishermen and their managersinhabited the same hut; Martin lived in the next one.

One of the girls, whose name was Else, had known Jurgen fromchildhood; they were glad to see each other, and were of the sameopinion on many points, but in appearance they were entirely opposite;for he was dark, and she was pale, and fair, and had flaxen hair,and eyes as blue as the sea in sunshine.

As they were walking together one day, Jurgen held her hand veryfirmly in his, and she said to him:   "Jurgen, I have something I want to say to you; let me be yourmanager, for you are like a brother to me; but Martin, whosehousekeeper I am- he is my lover- but you need not tell this to theothers."

It seemed to Jurgen as if the loose sand was giving way underhis feet. He did not speak a word, but nodded his head, and that meant"yes." It was all that was necessary; but he suddenly felt in hisheart that he hated Martin, and the more he thought the more he feltconvinced that Martin had stolen away from him the only being heever loved, and that this was Else: he had never thought of Else inthis way before, but now it all became plain to him.

When the sea is rather rough, and the fishermen are coming home intheir great boats, it is wonderful to see how they cross the reefs.One of them stands upright in the bow of the boat, and the otherswatch him sitting with the oars in their hands. Outside the reef itlooks as if the boat was not approaching land but going back to sea;then the man who is standing up gives them the signal that the greatwave is coming which is to float them across the reef. The boat islifted high into the air, so that the keel is seen from the shore; thenext moment nothing can be seen, mast, keel, and people are allhidden- it seems as though the sea had devoured them; but in a fewmoments they emerge like a great sea animal climbing up the waves, andthe oars move as if the creature had legs. The second and third reefare passed in the same manner; then the fishermen jump into thewater and push the boat towards the shore- every wave helps them-and at length they have it drawn up, beyond the reach of the breakers.

A wrong order given in front of the reef- the slightesthesitation- and the boat would be lost,

"Then it would be all over with me and Martin too!"

This thought passed through Jurgen's mind one day while theywere out at sea, where his foster-father had been taken suddenlyill. The fever had seized him. They were only a few oars' strokes fromthe reef, and Jurgen sprang from his seat and stood up in the bow.

"Father-let me come!" he said, and he glanced at Martin and acrossthe waves; every oar bent with the exertions of the rowers as thegreat wave came towards them, and he saw his father's pale face, anddared not obey the evil impulse that had shot through his brain. Theboat came safely across the reef to land; but the evil thoughtremained in his heart, and roused up every little fibre ofbitterness which he remembered between himself and Martin since theyhad known each other. But he could not weave the fibres together,nor did he endeavour to do so. He felt that Martin had robbed him, andthis was enough to make him hate his former friend. Several of thefishermen saw this, but Martin did not- he remained as obliging andtalkative as ever, in fact he talked rather too much.

Jurgen's foster-father took to his bed, and it became hisdeath-bed, for he died a week afterwards; and now Jurgen was heir tothe little house behind the sand-hills. It was small, certainly, butstill it was something, and Martin had nothing of the kind.

"You will not go to sea again, Jurgen, I suppose," observed one ofthe old fishermen. "You will always stay with us now."

But this was not Jurgen's intention; he wanted to see something ofthe world. The eel-breeder of Fjaltring had an uncle at Old Skjagen,who was a fisherman, but also a prosperous merchant with ships uponthe sea; he was said to be a good old man, and it would not be a badthing to enter his service. Old Skjagen lies in the extreme north ofJutland, as far away from the Hunsby dunes as one can travel in thatcountry; and this is just what pleased Jurgen, for he did not wantto remain till the wedding of Martin and Else, which would takeplace in a week or two.

The old fisherman said it was foolish to go away, for now thatJurgen had a home Else would very likely be inclined to take himinstead of Martin.

Jurgen gave such a vague answer that it was not easy to make outwhat he meant- the old man brought Else to him, and she said:

"You have a home now; you ought to think of that."

And Jurgen thought of many things.

The sea has heavy waves, but there are heavier waves in thehuman heart. Many thoughts, strong and weak, rushed through Jurgen'sbrain, and he said to Else:

"If Martin had a house like mine, which of us would you ratherhave?"

"But Martin has no house and cannot get one."

"Suppose he had one?"

"Well, then I would certainly take Martin, for that is what myheart tells me; but one cannot live upon love."

Jurgen turned these things over in his mind all night. Somethingwas working within him, he hardly knew what it was, but it was evenstronger than his love for Else; and so he went to Martin's, andwhat he said and did there was well considered. He let the house toMartin on most liberal terms, saying that he wished to go to seaagain, because he loved it. And Else kissed him when she heard ofit, for she loved Martin best.

Jurgen proposed to start early in the morning, and on theevening before his departure, when it was already getting rather late,he felt a wish to visit Martin once more. He started, and among thedunes met the old fisherman, who was angry at his leaving the place.The old man made jokes about Martin, and declared there must be somemagic about that fellow, of whom the girls were so fond.

Jurgen did not pay any attention to his remarks, but said good-byeto the old man and went on towards the house where Martin dwelt. Heheard loud talking inside; Martin was not alone, and this madeJurgen waver in his determination, for he did not wish to see Elseagain. On second thoughts, he decided that it was better not to hearany more thanks from Martin, and so he turned back.

On the following morning, before the sun rose, he fastened hisknapsack on his back, took his wooden provision box in his hand, andwent away among the sand-hills towards the coast path. This way wasmore pleasant than the heavy sand road, and besides it was shorter;and he intended to go first to Fjaltring, near Bovbjerg, where theeel-breeder lived, to whom he had promised a visit.

The sea lay before him, clear and blue, and the mussel shellsand pebbles, the playthings of his childhood, crunched over hisfeet. While he thus walked on his nose suddenly began to bleed; it wasa trifling occurrence, but trifles sometimes are of greatimportance. A few large drops of blood fell upon one of his sleeves.He wiped them off and stopped the bleeding, and it seemed to him as ifthis had cleared and lightened his brain. The sea-cale bloomed hereand there in the sand as he passed. He broke off a spray and stuckit in his hat; he determined to be merry and light-hearted, for he wasgoing out into the wide world- "a little way out, beyond the bay,"as the young eels had said. "Beware of bad people who will catchyou, and skin you, and put you in the frying-pan!" he repeated inhis mind, and smiled, for he thought he should find his way throughthe world- good courage is a strong weapon!

The sun was high in the heavens when he approached the narrowentrance to Nissum Bay. He looked back and saw a couple of horsemengalloping a long distance behind him, and there were other people withthem. But this did not concern him.

The ferry-boat was on the opposite side of the bay. Jurgencalled to the ferry-man, and the latter came over with his boat.Jurgen stepped in; but before he had got half-way across, the men whomhe had seen riding so hastily, came up, hailed the ferry-man, andcommanded him to return in the name of the law. Jurgen did notunderstand the reason of this, but he thought it would be best to turnback, and therefore he himself took an oar and returned. As soon asthe boat touched the shore, the men sprang on board, and before he wasaware of it, they had bound his hands with a rope.

"This wicked deed will cost you your life," they said. "It is agood thing we have caught you."

He was accused of nothing less than murder. Martin had beenfound dead, with his throat cut. One of the fishermen, late on theprevious evening, had met Jurgen going towards Martin's house; thiswas not the first time Jurgen had raised his knife against Martin,so they felt sure that he was the murderer. The prison was in a townat a great distance, and the wind was contrary for going there by sea;but it would not take half an hour to get across the bay, andanother quarter of an hour would bring them to Norre-Vosborg, thegreat castle with ramparts and moat. One of Jurgen's captors was afisherman, a brother of the keeper of the castle, and he said it mightbe managed that Jurgen should be placed for the present in the dungeonat Vosborg, where Long Martha the gipsy had been shut up till herexecution. They paid no attention to Jurgen's defence; the few dropsof blood on his shirt-sleeve bore heavy witness against him. But hewas conscious of his innocence, and as there was no chance of clearinghimself at present he submitted to his fate.

The party landed just at the place where Sir Bugge's castle hadstood, and where Jurgen had walked with his foster-parents after theburial feast, during. the four happiest days of his childhood. Hewas led by the well-known path, over the meadow to Vosborg; oncemore the elders were in bloom and the lofty lime-trees gave forthsweet fragrance, and it seemed as if it were but yesterday that he hadlast seen the spot. In each of the two wings of the castle there was astaircase which led to a place below the entrance, from whence thereis access to a low, vaulted cellar. In this dungeon Long Martha hadbeen imprisoned, and from here she was led away to the scaffold. Shehad eaten the hearts of five children, and had imagined that if shecould obtain two more she would be able to fly and make herselfinvisible. In the middle of the roof of the cellar there was alittle narrow air-hole, but no window. The flowering lime treescould not breathe refreshing fragrance into that abode, whereeverything was dark and mouldy. There was only a rough bench in thecell; but a good conscience is a soft pillow, and therefore Jurgencould sleep well.

The thick oaken door was locked, and secured on the outside byan iron bar; but the goblin of superstition can creep through akeyhole into a baron's castle just as easily as it can into afisherman's cottage, and why should he not creep in here, where Jurgensat thinking of Long Martha and her wicked deeds? Her last thoughts onthe night before her execution had filled this place, and the magicthat tradition asserted to have been practised here, in SirSvanwedel's time, came into Jurgen's mind, and made him shudder; but asunbeam, a refreshing thought from without, penetrated his hearteven here- it was the remembrance of the flowering elder and the sweetsmelling lime-trees.

He was not left there long. They took him away to the town ofRingkjobing, where he was imprisoned with equal severity.

Those times were not like ours. The common people were treatedharshly; and it was just after the days when farms were converted intoknights' estates, when coachmen and servants were often mademagistrates, and had power to sentence a poor man, for a smalloffence, to lose his property and to corporeal punishment. Judges ofthis kind were still to be found; and in Jutland, so far from thecapital, and from the enlightened, well-meaning, head of theGovernment, the law was still very loosely administered sometimes- thesmallest grievance Jurgen could expect was that his case should bedelayed.

His dwelling was cold and comfortless; and how long would he beobliged to bear all this? It seemed his fate to suffer misfortuneand sorrow innocently. He now had plenty of time to reflect on thedifference of fortune on earth, and to wonder why this fate had beenallotted to him; yet he felt sure that all would be made clear inthe next life, the existence that awaits us when this life is over.His faith had grown strong in the poor fisherman's cottage; thelight which had never shone into his father's mind, in all therichness and sunshine of Spain, was sent to him to be his comfort inpoverty and distress, a sign of that mercy of God which never fails.

The spring storms began to blow. The rolling and moaning of theNorth Sea could be heard for miles inland when the wind was blowing,and then it sounded like the rushing of a thousand waggons over a hardroad with a mine underneath. Jurgen heard these sounds in hisprison, and it was a relief to him. No music could have touched hisheart as did these sounds of the sea- the rolling sea, the boundlesssea, on which a man can be borne across the world before the wind,carrying his own house with him wherever he goes, just as the snailcarries its home even into a strange country.

He listened eagerly to its deep murmur and then the thought arose-"Free! free! How happy to be free, even barefooted and in raggedclothes!" Sometimes, when such thoughts crossed his mind, the fierynature rose within him, and he beat the wall with his clenched fists.

Weeks, months, a whole year had gone by, when Niels the thief,called also a horse-dealer, was arrested; and now better times came,and it was seen that Jurgen had been wrongly accused.

On the afternoon before Jurgen's departure from home, and beforethe murder, Niels the thief, had met Martin at a beer-house in theneighbourhood of Ringkjobing. A few glasses were drank, not enoughto cloud the brain, but enough to loosen Martin's tongue. He beganto boast and to say that he had obtained a house and intended tomarry, and when Niels asked him where he was going to get the money,he slapped his pocket proudly and said:

"The money is here, where it ought to be."

This boast cost him his life; for when he went home Niels followedhim, and cut his throat, intending to rob the murdered man of thegold, which did not exist.

All this was circumstantially explained; but it is enough for usto know that Jurgen was set free. But what compensation did he get forhaving been imprisoned a whole year, and shut out from allcommunication with his fellow creatures? They told him he wasfortunate in being proved innocent, and that he might go. Theburgomaster gave him two dollars for travelling expenses, and manycitizens offered him provisions and beer- there were still goodpeople; they were not all hard and pitiless. But the best thing of allwas that the merchant Bronne, of Skjagen, into whose service Jurgenhad proposed entering the year before, was just at that time onbusiness in the town of Ringkjobing. Bronne heard the whole story;he was kind-hearted, and understood what Jurgen must have felt andsuffered. Therefore he made up his mind to make it up to the poor lad,and convince him that there were still kind folks in the world.

So Jurgen went forth from prison as if to paradise, to findfreedom, affection, and trust. He was to travel this path now, forno goblet of life is all bitterness; no good man would pour out such adraught for his fellow-man, and how should He do it, Who is lovepersonified?

"Let everything be buried and forgotten," said Bronne, themerchant. "Let us draw a thick line through last year: we will evenburn the almanack. In two days we will start for dear, friendly,peaceful Skjagen. People call it an out-of-the-way corner; but it is agood warm chimney-corner, and its windows open toward every part ofthe world."

What a journey that was: It was like taking fresh breath out ofthe cold dungeon air into the warm sunshine. The heather bloomed inpride and beauty, and the shepherd-boy sat on a barrow and blew hispipe, which he had carved for himself out of a sheep bone. FataMorgana, the beautiful aerial phenomenon of the wilderness, appearedwith hanging gardens and waving forests, and the wonderful cloudcalled "Lokeman driving his sheep" also was seen.

Up towards Skjagen they went, through the land of the Wendels,whence the men with long beards (the Longobardi or Lombards) hademigrated in the reign of King Snio, when all the children and oldpeople were to have been killed, till the noble Dame Gambaruk proposedthat the young people should emigrate. Jurgen knew all this, he hadsome little knowledge; and although he did not know the land of theLombards beyond the lofty Alps, he had an idea that it must bethere, for in his boyhood he had been in the south, in Spain. Hethought of the plenteousness of the southern fruit, of the redpomegranate flowers, of the humming, buzzing, and toiling in the greatbeehive of a city he had seen; but home is the best place after all,and Jurgen's home was Denmark.

At last they arrived at "Vendilskaga," as Skjagen is called in oldNorwegian and Icelandic writings. At that time Old Skjagen, with theeastern and western town, extended for miles, with sand hills andarable land as far as the lighthouse near "Grenen." Then, as now,the houses were strewn among the wind-raised sand-hills- awilderness in which the wind sports with the sand, and where the voiceof the sea-gull and wild swan strikes harshly on the ear.

In the south-west, a mile from "Grenen," lies Old Skjagen;merchant Bronne dwelt here, and this was also to be Jurgen's homefor the future. The dwelling-house was tarred, and all the smallout-buildings had been put together from pieces of wreck. There was nofence, for indeed there was nothing to fence in except the long rowsof fishes which were hung upon lines, one above the other, to dry inthe wind. The entire coast was strewn with spoiled herrings, for therewere so many of these fish that a net was scarcely thrown into the seabefore it was filled. They were caught by carloads, and many of themwere either thrown back into the sea or left to lie on the beach.

The old man's wife and daughter and his servants also came to meethim with great rejoicing. There was a great squeezing of hands, andtalking and questioning. And the daughter, what a sweet face andbright eyes she had!

The inside of the house was comfortable and roomy. Fritters,that a king would have looked upon as a dainty dish, were placed onthe table, and there was wine from the Skjagen vineyard- that is,the sea; for there the grapes come ashore ready pressed and preparedin barrels and in bottles.

When the mother and daughter heard who Jurgen was, and howinnocently he had suffered, they looked at him in a still morefriendly way; and pretty Clara's eyes had a look of especialinterest as she listened to his story. Jurgen found a happy home inOld Skjagen. It did his heart good, for it had been sorely tried. Hehad drunk the bitter goblet of love which softens or hardens theheart, according to circumstances. Jurgen's heart was still soft- itwas young, and therefore it was a good thing that Miss Clara was goingin three weeks' time to Christiansand in Norway, in her father's ship,to visit an aunt and to stay there the whole winter.

On the Sunday before she went away they all went to church, to theHoly Communion. The church was large and handsome, and had beenbuilt centuries before by Scotchmen and Dutchmen; it stood some littleway out of the town. It was rather ruinous certainly, and the roadto it was heavy, through deep sand, but the people gladly surmountedthese difficulties to get to the house of God, to sing psalms and tohear the sermon. The sand had heaped itself up round the walls ofthe church, but the graves were kept free from it.

It was the largest church north of the Limfjorden. The VirginMary, with a golden crown on her head and the child Jesus in her arms,stood lifelike on the altar; the holy Apostles had been carved inthe choir, and on the walls there were portraits of the oldburgomasters and councillors of Skjagen; the pulpit was of carvedwork. The sun shone brightly into the church, and its radiance fell onthe polished brass chandelier and on the little ship that hung fromthe vaulted roof.

Jurgen felt overcome by a holy, childlike feeling, like that whichpossessed him, when, as a boy, he stood in the splendid Spanishcathedral. But here the feeling was different, for he felt consciousof being one of the congregation.

After the sermon followed Holy Communion. He partook of thebread and wine, and it so happened that he knelt by the side of MissClara; but his thoughts were so fixed upon heaven and the HolySacrament that he did not notice his neighbour until he rose fromhis knees, and then he saw tears rolling down her cheeks.

She left Skjagen and went to Norway two days later. He remainedbehind, and made himself useful on the farm and at the fishery. Hewent out fishing, and in those days fish were more plentiful andlarger than they are now. The shoals of the mackerel glittered inthe dark nights, and indicated where they were swimming; thegurnards snarled, and the crabs gave forth pitiful yells when theywere chased, for fish are not so mute as people say.

Every Sunday Jurgen went to church; and when his eyes rested onthe picture of the Virgin Mary over the altar as he sat there, theyoften glided away to the spot where they had knelt side by side.

Autumn came, and brought rain and snow with it; the water roseup right into the town of Skjagen, the sand could not suck it allin, one had to wade through it or go by boat. The storms threwvessel after vessel on the fatal reefs; there were snow-storm andsand-storms; the sand flew up to the houses, blocking the entrances,so that people had to creep up through the chimneys; that wasnothing at all remarkable here. It was pleasant and cheerfulindoors, where peat fuel and fragments of wood from the wrecksblazed and crackled upon the hearth. Merchant Bronne read aloud,from an old chronicle, about Prince Hamlet of Denmark, who had comeover from England, landed near Bovbjerg, and fought a battle; close byRamme was his grave, only a few miles from the place where theeel-breeder lived; hundreds of barrow rose there from the heath,forming as it were an enormous churchyard. Merchant Bronne hadhimself been at Hamlet's grave; they spoke about old times, and abouttheir neighbours, the English and the Scotch, and Jurgen sang the airof "The King of England's Son," and of his splendid ship and itsoutfit.

   "In the hour of peril when most men fear,

He clasped the bride that he held so dear,

And proved himself the son of a King;

Of his courage and valour let us sing."

This verse Jurgen sang with so much feeling that his eyesbeamed, and they were black and sparkling since his infancy.

There was wealth, comfort, and happiness even among the domesticanimals, for they were all well cared for, and well kept. Thekitchen looked bright with its copper and tin utensils, and whiteplates, and from the rafters hung hams, beef, and winter stores inplenty. This can still be seen in many rich farms on the west coast ofJutland: plenty to eat and drink, clean, prettily decorated rooms,active minds, cheerful tempers, and hospitality can be found there, asin an Arab's tent.

Jurgen had never spent such a happy time since the famous burialfeast, and yet Miss Clara was absent, except in the thoughts andmemory of all.

In April a ship was to start for Norway, and Jurgen was to sail init. He was full of life and spirits, and looked so sturdy and wellthat Dame Bronne said it did her good to see him.

"And it does one good to look at you also, old wife," said themerchant. "Jurgen has brought fresh life into our winter evenings, andinto you too, mother. You look younger than ever this year, and seemwell and cheerful. But then you were once the prettiest girl inViborg, and that is saying a great deal, for I have always found theViborg girls the prettiest of any."

Jurgen said nothing, but he thought of a certain maiden ofSkjagen, whom he was soon to visit. The ship set sail forChristiansand in Norway, and as the wind was favourable it soonarrived there.

One morning merchant Bronne went out to the lighthouse, whichstands a little way out of Old Skjagen, not far from "Grenen." Thelight was out, and the sun was already high in the heavens, when hemounted the tower. The sand-banks extend a whole mile from theshore, beneath the water, outside these banks; many ships could beseen that day, and with the aid of his telescope the old man thoughthe descried his own ship, the Karen Bronne. Yes! certainly, thereshe was, sailing homewards with Clara and Jurgen on board.

Clara sat on deck, and saw the sand-hills gradually appearing inthe distance; the church and lighthouse looked like a heron and a swanrising from the blue waters. If the wind held good they might reachhome in about an hour. So near they were to home and all its joys-so near to death and all its terrors! A plank in the ship gave way,and the water rushed in; the crew flew to the pumps, and did theirbest to stop the leak. A signal of distress was hoisted, but they werestill fully a mile from the shore. Some fishing boats were in sight,but they were too far off to be of any use. The wind blew towardsthe land, the tide was in their favour, but it was all useless; theship could not be saved.

Jurgen threw his right arm round Clara, and pressed her to him.With what a look she gazed up into his face, as with a prayer to Godfor help he breasted the waves, which rushed over the sinking ship!She uttered a cry, but she felt safe and certain that he would notleave her to sink. And in this hour of terror and danger Jurgen feltas the king's son did, as told in the old song:

   "In the hour of peril when most men fear,

He clasped the bride that he held so dear."

How glad he felt that he was a good swimmer! He worked his wayonward with his feet and one arm, while he held the young girl upfirmly with the other. He rested on the waves, he trod the water- infact, did everything he could think of, in order not to fatiguehimself, and to reserve strength enough to reach land. He heardClara sigh, and felt her shudder convulsively, and he pressed her moreclosely to him. Now and then a wave rolled over them, the currentlifted them; the water, although deep, was so clear that for amoment he imagined he saw the shoals of mackerel glittering, orLeviathan himself ready to swallow them. Now the clouds cast ashadow over the water, then again came the playing sunbeams; flocks ofloudly screaming birds passed over him, and the plump and lazy wildducks which allow themselves to be drifted by the waves rose upterrified at the sight of the swimmer. He began to feel his strengthdecreasing, but he was only a few cable lengths' distance from theshore, and help was coming, for a boat was approaching him. At thismoment he distinctly saw a white staring figure under the water- awave lifted him up, and he came nearer to the figure- he felt aviolent shock, and everything became dark around him.

On the sand reef lay the wreck of a ship, which was covered withwater at high tide; the white figure head rested against the anchor,the sharp iron edge of which rose just above the surface. Jurgen hadcome in contact with this; the tide had driven him against it withgreat force. He sank down stunned with the blow, but the next wavelifted him and the young girl up again. Some fishermen, coming witha boat, seized them and dragged them into it. The blood streameddown over Jurgen's face; he seemed dead, but still held the young girlso tightly that they were obliged to take her from him by force. Shewas pale and lifeless; they laid her in the boat, and rowed as quicklyas possible to the shore. They tried every means to restore Clara tolife, but it was all of no avail. Jurgen had been swimming for somedistance with a corpse in his arms, and had exhausted his strength forone who was dead.

Jurgen still breathed, so the fishermen carried him to the nearesthouse upon the sand-hills, where a smith and general dealer livedwho knew something of surgery, and bound up Jurgen's wounds in atemporary way until a surgeon could be obtained from the nearesttown the next day. The injured man's brain was affected, and in hisdelirium he uttered wild cries; but on the third day he lay quietand weak upon his bed; his life seemed to hang by a thread, and thephysician said it would be better for him if this thread broke. "Letus pray that God may take him," he said, "for he will never be thesame man again."

But life did not depart from him- the thread would not break,but the thread of memory was severed; the thread of his mind hadbeen cut through, and what was still more grievous, a body remained- aliving healthy body that wandered about like a troubled spirit.

Jurgen remained in merchant Bronne's house. "He was hurt whileendeavouring to save our child," said the old man, "and now he isour son." People called Jurgen insane, but that was not exactly thecorrect term. He was like an instrument in which the strings are looseand will give no sound; only occasionally they regained their powerfor a few minutes, and then they sounded as they used to do. Hewould sing snatches of songs or old melodies, pictures of the pastwould rise before him, and then disappear in the mist, as it were, butas a general rule he sat staring into vacancy, without a thought. Wemay conjecture that he did not suffer, but his dark eyes lost theirbrightness, and looked like clouded glass.

"Poor mad Jurgen," said the people. And this was the end of a lifewhose infancy was to have been surrounded with wealth and splendourhad his parents lived! All his great mental abilities had been lost,nothing but hardship, sorrow, and disappointment had been his fate. Hewas like a rare plant, torn from its native soil, and tossed uponthe beach to wither there. And was this one of God's creatures,fashioned in His own likeness, to have no better fate? Was he to beonly the plaything of fortune? No! the all-loving Creator wouldcertainly repay him in the life to come for what he had suffered andlost here. "The Lord is good to all; and His mercy is over all Hisworks." The pious old wife of the merchant repeated these words fromthe Psalms of David in patience and hope, and the prayer of herheart was that Jurgen might soon be called away to enter intoeternal life.

In the churchyard where the walls were surrounded with sandClara lay buried. Jurgen did not seem to know this; it did not enterhis mind, which could only retain fragments of the past. EverySunday he went to church with the old people, and sat theresilently, staring vacantly before him. One day, when the Psalms werebeing sung, he sighed deeply, and his eyes became bright; they werefixed upon a place near the altar where he had knelt with his friendwho was dead. He murmured her name, and became deadly pale, andtears rolled down his cheeks. They led him out of church; he toldthose standing round him that he was well, and had never been ill; he,who had been so grievously afflicted, the outcast, thrown upon theworld, could not remember his sufferings. The Lord our Creator is wiseand full of loving kindness- who can doubt it?

In Spain, where balmy breezes blow over the Moorish cupolas andgently stir the orange and myrtle groves, where singing and thesound of the castanets are always heard, the richest merchant in theplace, a childless old man, sat in a luxurious house, while childrenmarched in procession through the streets with waving flags andlighted tapers. If he had been able to press his children to hisheart, his daughter, or her child, that had, perhaps never seen thelight of day, far less the kingdom of heaven, how much of his wealthwould he not have given! "Poor child!" Yes, poor child- a child still,yet more than thirty years old, for Jurgen had arrived at this agein Old Skjagen.

The shifting sands had covered the graves in the courtyard,quite up to the church walls, but still, the dead must be buried amongtheir relatives and the dear ones who had gone before them. MerchantBronne and his wife now rested with their children under the whitesand.

It was in the spring- the season of storms. The sand from thedunes was whirled up in clouds; the sea was rough, and flocks of birdsflew like clouds in the storm, screaming across the sand-hills.Shipwreck followed upon shipwreck on the reefs between Old Skagenand the Hunsby dunes.

One evening Jurgen sat in his room alone: all at once his mindseemed to become clearer, and a restless feeling came over him, suchas had often, in his younger days, driven him out to wander over thesand-hills or on the heath. "Home, home!" he cried. No one heardhim. He went out and walked towards the dunes. Sand and stones blewinto his face, and whirled round him; he went in the direction ofthe church. The sand was banked up the walls, half covering thewindows, but it had been cleared away in front of the door, and theentrance was free and easy to open, so Jurgen went into the church.

The storm raged over the town of Skjagen; there had not beensuch a terrible tempest within the memory of the inhabitants, nor sucha rough sea. But Jurgen was in the temple of God, and while thedarkness of night reigned outside, a light arose in his soul thatwas never to depart from it; the heavy weight that pressed on hisbrain burst asunder. He fancied he heard the organ, but it was onlythe storm and the moaning of the sea. He sat down on one of the seats,and lo! the candies were lighted one by one, and there wasbrightness and grandeur such as he had only seen in the Spanishcathedral. The portraits of the old citizens became alive, steppeddown from the walls against which they had hung for centuries, andtook seats near the church door. The gates flew open, and all the deadpeople from the churchyard came in, and filled the church, whilebeautiful music sounded. Then the melody of the psalm burst forth,like the sound of the waters, and Jurgen saw that his foster parentsfrom the Hunsby dunes were there, also old merchant Bronne with hiswife and their daughter Clara, who gave him her hand. They both wentup to the altar where they had knelt before, and the priest joinedtheir hands and united them for life. Then music was heard again; itwas wonderfully sweet, like a child's voice, full of joy andexpectation, swelling to the powerful tones of a full organ, sometimessoft and sweet, then like the sounds of a tempest, delightful andelevating to hear, yet strong enough to burst the stone tombs of thedead. Then the little ship that hung from the roof of the choir waslet down and looked wonderfully large and beautiful with its silkensails and rigging:

 "The ropes were of silk, the anchor of gold,

  And everywhere riches and pomp untold,"as the old song says.

The young couple went on board, accompanied by the wholecongregation, for there was room and enjoyment for them all. Thenthe walls and arches of the church were covered with floweringjunipers and lime trees breathing forth fragrance; the branches waved,creating a pleasant coolness; they bent and parted, and the shipsailed between them through the air and over the sea. Every candlein the church became a star, and the wind sang a hymn in which theyall joined. "Through love to glory, no life is lost, the future isfull of blessings and happiness. Hallelujah!" These were the lastwords Jurgen uttered in this world, for the thread that bound hisimmortal soul was severed, and nothing but the dead body lay in thedark church, while the storm raged outside, covering it with loosesand.

The next day was Sunday, and the congregation and their pastorwent to the church. The road had always been heavy, but now it wasalmost unfit for use, and when they at last arrived at the church, agreat heap of sand lay piled up in front of them. The whole church wascompletely buried in sand. The clergyman offered a short prayer, andsaid that God had closed the door of His house here, and that thecongregation must go and build a new one for Him somewhere else. Sothey sung a hymn in the open air, and went home again.

Jurgen could not be found anywhere in the town of Skjagen, noron the dunes, though they searched for him everywhere. They came tothe conclusion that one of the great waves, which had rolled far upon the beach, had carried him away; but his body lay buried in agreat sepulchre- the church itself. The Lord had thrown down acovering for his grave during the storm, and the heavy mound of sandlies upon it to this day. The drifting sand had covered the vaultedroof of the church, the arched cloisters, and the stone aisles. Thewhite thorn and the dog rose now blossom above the place where thechurch lies buried, but the spire, like an enormous monument over agrave, can be seen for miles round. No king has a more splendidmemorial. Nothing disturbs the peaceful sleep of the dead. I was thefirst to hear this story, for the storm sung it to me among thesand-hills.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

  ANNE LISBETH

   by Hans Christian Andersen

ANNE LISBETH was a beautiful young woman, with a red and whitecomplexion, glittering white teeth, and clear soft eyes; and herfootstep was light in the dance, but her mind was lighter still. Shehad a little child, not at all pretty; so he was put out to benursed by a laborer's wife, and his mother went to the count's castle.She sat in splendid rooms, richly decorated with silk and velvet;not a breath of air was allowed to blow upon her, and no one wasallowed to speak to her harshly, for she was nurse to the count'schild. He was fair and delicate as a prince, and beautiful as anangel; and how she loved this child! Her own boy was provided for bybeing at the laborer's where the mouth watered more frequently thanthe pot boiled, and where in general no one was at home to take careof the child. Then he would cry, but what nobody knows nobody caresfor; so he would cry till he was tired, and then fall asleep; andwhile we are asleep we can feel neither hunger nor thirst. Ah, yes;sleep is a capital invention.

As years went on, Anne Lisbeth's child grew apace like weeds,although they said his growth had been stunted. He had become quitea member of the family in which he dwelt; they received money tokeep him, so that his mother got rid of him altogether. She had becomequite a lady; she had a comfortable home of her own in the town; andout of doors, when she went for a walk, she wore a bonnet; but shenever walked out to see the laborer: that was too far from the town,and, indeed, she had nothing to go for, the boy now belonged tothese laboring people. He had food, and he could also do somethingtowards earning his living; he took care of Mary's red cow, for heknew how to tend cattle and make himself useful.

The great dog by the yard gate of a nobleman's mansion sitsproudly on the top of his kennel when the sun shines, and barks atevery one that passes; but if it rains, he creeps into his house,and there he is warm and dry. Anne Lisbeth's boy also sat in thesunshine on the top of the fence, cutting out a little toy. If itwas spring-time, he knew of three strawberry-plants in blossom,which would certainly bear fruit. This was his most hopeful thought,though it often came to nothing. And he had to sit out in the rainin the worst weather, and get wet to the skin, and let the cold winddry the clothes on his back afterwards. If he went near the farmyardbelonging to the count, he was pushed and knocked about, for the menand the maids said he was so horrible ugly; but he was used to allthis, for nobody loved him. This was how the world treated AnneLisbeth's boy, and how could it be otherwise. It was his fate to bebeloved by no one. Hitherto he had been a land crab; the land atlast cast him adrift. He went to sea in a wretched vessel, and satat the helm, while the skipper sat over the grog-can. He was dirty andugly, half-frozen and half-starved; he always looked as if he neverhad enough to eat, which was really the case.

Late in the autumn, when the weather was rough, windy, and wet,and the cold penetrated through the thickest clothing, especially atsea, a wretched boat went out to sea with only two men on board, or,more correctly, a man and a half, for it was the skipper and hisboy. There had only been a kind of twilight all day, and it soongrew quite dark, and so bitterly cold, that the skipper took a dram towarm him. The bottle was old, and the glass too. It was perfect in theupper part, but the foot was broken off, and it had therefore beenfixed upon a little carved block of wood, painted blue. A dram is agreat comfort, and two are better still, thought the skipper, whilethe boy sat at the helm, which he held fast in his hard seamedhands. He was ugly, and his hair was matted, and he looked crippledand stunted; they called him the field-laborer's boy, though in thechurch register he was entered as Anne Lisbeth's son. The wind cutthrough the rigging, and the boat cut through the sea. The sails,filled by the wind, swelled out and carried them along in wild career.It was wet and rough above and below, and might still be worse.Hold! what is that? What has struck the boat? Was it a waterspout,or a heavy sea rolling suddenly upon them?

"Heaven help us!" cried the boy at the helm, as the boat heeledover and lay on its beam ends. It had struck on a rock, which rosefrom the depths of the sea, and sank at once, like an old shoe in apuddle. "It sank at once with mouse and man," as the saying is.There might have been mice on board, but only one man and a half,the skipper and the laborer's boy. No one saw it but the skimmingsea-gulls and the fishes beneath the water; and even they did notsee it properly, for they darted back with terror as the boat filledwith water and sank. There it lay, scarcely a fathom below thesurface, and those two were provided for, buried, and forgotten. Theglass with the foot of blue wood was the only thing that did not sink,for the wood floated and the glass drifted away to be cast upon theshore and broken; where and when, is indeed of no consequence. Ithad served its purpose, and it had been loved, which Anne Lisbeth'sboy had not been. But in heaven no soul will be able to say, "Neverloved."

Anne Lisbeth had now lived in the town many years; she wascalled "Madame," and felt dignified in consequence; she remembered theold, noble days, in which she had driven in the carriage, and hadassociated with countess and baroness. Her beautiful, noble childhad been a dear angel, and possessed the kindest heart; he had lovedher so much, and she had loved him in return; they had kissed andloved each other, and the boy had been her joy, her second life. Nowhe was fourteen years of age, tall, handsome, and clever. She hadnot seen him since she carried him in her arms; neither had she beenfor years to the count's palace; it was quite a journey thither fromthe town.

"I must make one effort to go," said Anne Lisbeth, "to see mydarling, the count's sweet child, and press him to my heart. Certainlyhe must long to see me, too, the young count; no doubt he thinks of meand loves me, as in those days when he would fling his angel-armsround my neck, and lisp 'Anne Liz.' It was music to my ears. Yes, Imust make an effort to see him again." She drove across the country ina grazier's cart, and then got out, and continued her journey on foot,and thus reached the count's castle. It was as great and magnificentas it had always been, and the garden looked the same as ever; all theservants were strangers to her, not one of them knew Anne Lisbeth, norof what consequence she had once been there; but she felt sure thecountess would soon let them know it, and her darling boy, too: howshe longed to see him!

Now that Anne Lisbeth was at her journey's end, she was keptwaiting a long time; and for those who wait, time passes slowly. Butbefore the great people went in to dinner, she was called in andspoken to very graciously. She was to go in again after dinner, andthen she would see her sweet boy once more. How tall, and slender, andthin he had grown; but the eyes and the sweet angel mouth were stillbeautiful. He looked at her, but he did not speak, he certainly didnot know who she was. He turned round and was going away, but sheseized his hand and pressed it to her lips.

"Well, well," he said; and with that he walked out of the room. Hewho filled her every thought! he whom she loved best, and who washer whole earthly pride!

Anne Lisbeth went forth from the castle into the public road,feeling mournful and sad; he whom she had nursed day and night, andeven now carried about in her dreams, had been cold and strange, andhad not a word or thought respecting her. A great black raven darteddown in front of her on the high road, and croaked dismally.

"Ah," said she, "what bird of ill omen art thou?" Presently shepassed the laborer's hut; his wife stood at the door, and the twowomen spoke to each other.

"You look well," said the woman; "you're fat and plump; you arewell off."

"Oh yes," answered Anne Lisbeth.

"The boat went down with them," continued the woman; "Hans theskipper and the boy were both drowned; so there's an end of them. Ialways thought the boy would be able to help me with a few dollars.He'll never cost you anything more, Anne Lisbeth."

"So they were drowned," repeated Anne Lisbeth; but she said nomore, and the subject was dropped. She felt very low-spirited, becauseher count-child had shown no inclination to speak to her who loved himso well, and who had travelled so far to see him. The journey had costmoney too, and she had derived no great pleasure from it. Still shesaid not a word of all this; she could not relieve her heart bytelling the laborer's wife, lest the latter should think she did notenjoy her former position at the castle. Then the raven flew over her,screaming again as he flew.

"The black wretch!" said Anne Lisbeth, "he will end by frighteningme today." She had brought coffee and chicory with her, for shethought it would be a charity to the poor woman to give them to her toboil a cup of coffee, and then she would take a cup herself.

The woman prepared the coffee, and in the meantime Anne Lisbethseated her in a chair and fell asleep. Then she dreamed of somethingwhich she had never dreamed before; singularly enough she dreamed ofher own child, who had wept and hungered in the laborer's hut, and hadbeen knocked about in heat and in cold, and who was now lying in thedepths of the sea, in a spot only known by God. She fancied she wasstill sitting in the hut, where the woman was busy preparing thecoffee, for she could smell the coffee-berries roasting. Butsuddenly it seemed to her that there stood on the threshold abeautiful young form, as beautiful as the count's child, and thisapparition said to her, "The world is passing away; hold fast to me,for you are my mother after all; you have an angel in heaven, holdme fast;" and the child-angel stretched out his hand and seized her.Then there was a terrible crash, as of a world crumbling to pieces,and the angel-child was rising from the earth, and holding her bythe sleeve so tightly that she felt herself lifted from the ground;but, on the other hand, something heavy hung to her feet and draggedher down, and it seemed as if hundreds of women were clinging toher, and crying, "If thou art to be saved, we must be saved too.Hold fast, hold fast." And then they all hung on her, but there weretoo many; and as they clung the sleeve was torn, and Anne Lisbeth felldown in horror, and awoke. Indeed she was on the point of falling overin reality with the chair on which she sat; but she was so startledand alarmed that she could not remember what she had dreamed, onlythat it was something very dreadful.

They drank their coffee and had a chat together, and then AnneLisbeth went away towards the little town where she was to meet thecarrier, who was to drive her back to her own home. But when shecame to him she found that he would not be ready to start till theevening of the next day. Then she began to think of the expense, andwhat the distance would be to walk. She remembered that the route bythe sea-shore was two miles shorter than by the high road; and asthe weather was clear, and there would be moonlight, she determined tomake her way on foot, and to start at once, that she might reachhome the next day.

The sun had set, and the evening bells sounded through the airfrom the tower of the village church, but to her it was not the bells,but the cry of the frogs in the marshes. Then they ceased, and allaround became still; not a bird could be heard, they were all at rest,even the owl had not left her hiding place; deep silence reigned onthe margin of the wood by the sea-shore. As Anne Lisbeth walked on shecould hear her own footsteps in the sands; even the waves of the seawere at rest, and all in the deep waters had sunk into silence.There was quiet among the dead and the living in the deep sea. AnneLisbeth walked on, thinking of nothing at all, as people say, orrather her thoughts wandered, but not away from her, for thought isnever absent from us, it only slumbers. Many thoughts that have laindormant are roused at the proper time, and begin to stir in the mindand the heart, and seem even to come upon us from above. It iswritten, that a good deed bears a blessing for its fruit; and it isalso written, that the wages of sin is death. Much has been said andmuch written which we pass over or know nothing of. A light ariseswithin us, and then forgotten things make themselves remembered; andthus it was with Anne Lisbeth. The germ of every vice and every virtuelies in our heart, in yours and in mine; they lie like little grainsof seed, till a ray of sunshine, or the touch of an evil hand, oryou turn the corner to the right or to the left, and the decision ismade. The little seed is stirred, it swells and shoots up, and poursits sap into your blood, directing your course either for good orevil. Troublesome thoughts often exist in the mind, fermentingthere, which are not realized by us while the senses are as it wereslumbering; but still they are there. Anne Lisbeth walked on thus withher senses half asleep, but the thoughts were fermenting within her.

From one Shrove Tuesday to another, much may occur to weigh downthe heart; it is the reckoning of a whole year; much may be forgotten,sins against heaven in word and thought, sins against our neighbor,and against our own conscience. We are scarcely aware of theirexistence; and Anne Lisbeth did not think of any of her errors. Shehad committed no crime against the law of the land; she was anhonorable person, in a good position- that she knew.

She continued her walk along by the margin of the sea. What was itshe saw lying there? An old hat; a man's hat. Now when might that havebeen washed overboard? She drew nearer, she stopped to look at thehat; "Ha! what was lying yonder?" She shuddered; yet it was nothingsave a heap of grass and tangled seaweed flung across a long stone,but it looked like a corpse. Only tangled grass, and yet she wasfrightened at it. As she turned to walk away, much came into hermind that she had heard in her childhood: old superstitions ofspectres by the sea-shore; of the ghosts of drowned but unburiedpeople, whose corpses had been washed up on the desolate beach. Thebody, she knew, could do no harm to any one, but the spirit couldpursue the lonely wanderer, attach itself to him, and demand to becarried to the churchyard, that it might rest in consecrated ground."Hold fast! hold fast!" the spectre would cry; and as Anne Lisbethmurmured these words to herself, the whole of her dream was suddenlyrecalled to her memory, when the mother had clung to her, anduttered these words, when, amid the crashing of worlds, her sleeve hadbeen torn, and she had slipped from the grasp of her child, who wantedto hold her up in that terrible hour. Her child, her own child,which she had never loved, lay now buried in the sea, and might riseup, like a spectre, from the waters, and cry, "Hold fast; carry meto consecrated ground!"

As these thoughts passed through her mind, fear gave speed toher feet, so that she walked faster and faster. Fear came upon heras if a cold, clammy hand had been laid upon her heart, so that shealmost fainted. As she looked across the sea, all there grew darker; aheavy mist came rolling onwards, and clung to bush and tree,distorting them into fantastic shapes. She turned and glanced at themoon, which had risen behind her. It looked like a pale, raylesssurface, and a deadly weight seemed to hang upon her limbs. "Hold,"thought she; and then she turned round a second time to look at themoon. A white face appeared quite close to her, with a mist, hanginglike a garment from its shoulders. "Stop! carry me to consecratedearth," sounded in her ears, in strange, hollow tones. The sound didnot come from frogs or ravens; she saw no sign of such creatures. "Agrave! dig me a grave!" was repeated quite loud. Yes, it was indeedthe spectre of her child. The child that lay beneath the ocean, andwhose spirit could have no rest until it was carried to thechurchyard, and until a grave had been dug for it in consecratedground. She would go there at once, and there she would dig. Sheturned in the direction of the church, and the weight on her heartseemed to grow lighter, and even to vanish altogether; but when sheturned to go home by the shortest way, it returned. "Stop! stop!"and the words came quite clear, though they were like the croak of afrog, or the wail of a bird. "A grave! dig me a grave!"

The mist was cold and damp, her hands and face were moist andclammy with horror, a heavy weight again seized her and clung toher, her mind became clear for thoughts that had never before beenthere.

In these northern regions, a beech-wood often buds in a singlenight and appears in the morning sunlight in its full glory ofyouthful green. So, in a single instant, can the consciousness ofthe sin that has been committed in thoughts, words, and actions of ourpast life, be unfolded to us. When once the conscience is awakened, itsprings up in the heart spontaneously, and God awakens theconscience when we least expect it. Then we can find no excuse forourselves; the deed is there and bears witness against us. Thethoughts seem to become words, and to sound far out into the world. Weare horrified at the thought of what we have carried within us, and atthe consciousness that we have not overcome the evil which has itsorigin in thoughtlessness and pride. The heart conceals withinitself the vices as well as the virtues, and they grow in theshallowest ground. Anne Lisbeth now experienced in thought what wehave clothed in words. She was overpowered by them, and sank downand crept along for some distance on the ground. "A grave! dig me agrave!" sounded again in her ears, and she would have gladly buriedherself, if in the grave she could have found forgetfulness of heractions.

It was the first hour of her awakening, full of anguish andhorror. Superstition made her alternately shudder with cold or burnwith the heat of fever. Many things, of which she had feared even tospeak, came into her mind. Silently, as the cloud-shadows in themoonshine, a spectral apparition flitted by her; she had heard of itbefore. Close by her galloped four snorting steeds, with fire flashingfrom their eyes and nostrils. They dragged a burning coach, and withinit sat the wicked lord of the manor, who had ruled there a hundredyears before. The legend says that every night, at twelve o'clock,he drove into his castleyard and out again. He was not as pale as deadmen are, but black as a coal. He nodded, and pointed to AnneLisbeth, crying out, "Hold fast! hold fast! and then you may rideagain in a nobleman's carriage, and forget your child."

She gathered herself up, and hastened to the churchyard; but blackcrosses and black ravens danced before her eyes, and she could notdistinguish one from the other. The ravens croaked as the raven haddone which she saw in the daytime, but now she understood what theysaid. "I am the raven-mother; I am the raven-mother," each ravencroaked, and Anne Lisbeth felt that the name also applied to her;and she fancied she should be transformed into a black bird, andhave to cry as they cried, if she did not dig the grave. And she threwherself upon the earth, and with her hands dug a grave in the hardground, so that the blood ran from her fingers. "A grave! dig me agrave!" still sounded in her ears; she was fearful that the cock mightcrow, and the first red streak appear in the east, before she hadfinished her work; and then she would be lost. And the cock crowed,and the day dawned in the east, and the grave was only half dug. Anicy hand passed over her head and face, and down towards her heart."Only half a grave," a voice wailed, and fled away. Yes, it fledaway over the sea; it was the ocean spectre; and, exhausted andoverpowered, Anne Lisbeth sunk to the ground, and her senses left her.

It was a bright day when she came to herself, and two men wereraising her up; but she was not lying in the churchyard, but on thesea-shore, where she had dug a deep hole in the sand, and cut her handwith a piece of broken glass, whose sharp stern was stuck in alittle block of painted wood. Anne Lisbeth was in a fever.Conscience had roused the memories of superstitions, and had soacted upon her mind, that she fancied she had only half a soul, andthat her child had taken the other half down into the sea. Never wouldshe be able to cling to the mercy of Heaven till she had recoveredthis other half which was now held fast in the deep water.

Anne Lisbeth returned to her home, but she was no longer the womanshe had been. Her thoughts were like a confused, tangled skein; onlyone thread, only one thought was clear to her, namely that she mustcarry the spectre of the sea-shore to the churchyard, and dig agrave for him there; that by so doing she might win back her soul.Many a night she was missed from her home, and was always found on thesea-shore waiting for the spectre.

In this way a whole year passed; and then one night she vanishedagain, and was not to be found. The whole of the next day was spent ina useless search after her.

Towards evening, when the clerk entered the church to toll thevesper bell, he saw by the altar Anne Lisbeth, who had spent the wholeday there. Her powers of body were almost exhausted, but her eyesflashed brightly, and on her cheeks was a rosy flush. The last rays ofthe setting sun shone upon her, and gleamed over the altar upon theshining clasps of the Bible, which lay open at the words of theprophet Joel, "Rend your hearts and not your garments, and turn untothe Lord."

"That was just a chance," people said; but do things happen bychance? In the face of Anne Lisbeth, lighted up by the evening sun,could be seen peace and rest. She said she was happy now, for shehad conquered. The spectre of the shore, her own child, had come toher the night before, and had said to her, "Thou hast dug me only halfa grave: but thou hast now, for a year and a day, buried me altogetherin thy heart, and it is there a mother can best hide her child!" Andthen he gave her back her lost soul, and brought her into thechurch. "Now I am in the house of God," she said, "and in that housewe are happy."

When the sun set, Anne Lisbeth's soul had risen to that regionwhere there is no more pain; and Anne Lisbeth's troubles were at anend.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   BEAUTY OF FORM AND BEAUTY OF MIND

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once a sculptor, named Alfred, who having won thelarge gold medal and obtained a travelling scholarship, went to Italy,and then came back to his native land. He was young at that time-indeed, he is young still, although he is ten years older than hewas then. On his return, he went to visit one of the little towns inthe island of Zealand. The whole town knew who the stranger was; andone of the richest men in the place gave a party in his honor, and allwho were of any consequence, or who possessed some property, wereinvited. It was quite an event, and all the town knew of it, so thatit was not necessary to announce it by beat of drum.Apprentice-boys, children of the poor, and even the poor peoplethemselves, stood before the house, watching the lighted windows;and the watchman might easily fancy he was giving a party also,there were so many people in the streets. There was quite an air offestivity about it, and the house was full of it; for Mr. Alfred,the sculptor, was there. He talked and told anecdotes, and every onelistened to him with pleasure, not unmingled with awe; but none feltso much respect for him as did the elderly widow of a naval officer.She seemed, so far as Mr. Alfred was concerned, to be like a pieceof fresh blotting-paper that absorbed all he said and asked formore. She was very appreciative, and incredibly ignorant- a kind offemale Gaspar Hauser.

"I should like to see Rome," she said; "it must be a lovelycity, or so many foreigners would not be constantly arriving there.Now, do give me a description of Rome. How does the city look when youenter in at the gate?"

"I cannot very well describe it," said the sculptor; "but youenter on a large open space, in the centre of which stands an obelisk,which is a thousand years old."

"An organist!" exclaimed the lady, who had never heard the word'obelisk.' Several of the guests could scarcely forbear laughing,and the sculptor would have had some difficulty in keeping hiscountenance, but the smile on his lips faded away; for he caught sightof a pair of dark-blue eyes close by the side of the inquisitive lady.They belonged to her daughter; and surely no one who had such adaughter could be silly. The mother was like a fountain ofquestions; and the daughter, who listened but never spoke, mighthave passed for the beautiful maid of the fountain. How charming shewas! She was a study for the sculptor to contemplate, but not toconverse with; for she did not speak, or, at least, very seldom.

"Has the pope a great family?" inquired the lady.

The young man answered considerately, as if the question hadbeen a different one, "No; he does not come from a great family."

"That is not what I asked," persisted the widow; "I mean, has he awife and children?"

"The pope is not allowed to marry," replied the gentleman.

"I don't like that," was the lady's remark.

She certainly might have asked more sensible questions; but if shehad not been allowed to say just what she liked, would her daughterhave been there, leaning so gracefully on her shoulder, and lookingstraight before her, with a smile that was almost mournful on herface?

Mr. Alfred again spoke of Italy, and of the glorious colors inItalian scenery; the purple hills, the deep blue of the Mediterranean,the azure of southern skies, whose brightness and glory could onlybe surpassed in the north by the deep-blue eyes of a maiden; and hesaid this with a peculiar intonation; but she who should haveunderstood his meaning looked quite unconscious of it, which alsowas charming.

"Beautiful Italy!" sighed some of the guests.

"Oh, to travel there!" exclaimed others.

"Charming! Charming!" echoed from every voice.

"I may perhaps win a hundred thousand dollars in the lottery,"said the naval officer's widow; "and if I do, we will travel- I and mydaughter; and you, Mr. Alfred, must be our guide. We can all threetravel together, with one or two more of our good friends." And shenodded in such a friendly way at the company, that each imaginedhimself to be the favored person who was to accompany them to Italy."Yes, we must go," she continued; "but not to those parts wherethere are robbers. We will keep to Rome. In the public roads one isalways safe."

The daughter sighed very gently; and how much there may be in asigh, or attributed to it! The young man attributed a great deal ofmeaning to this sigh. Those deep-blue eyes, which had been lit up thisevening in honor of him, must conceal treasures, treasures of heartand mind, richer than all the glories of Rome; and so when he left theparty that night, he had lost it completely to the young lady. Thehouse of the naval officer's widow was the one most constantly visitedby Mr. Alfred, the sculptor. It was soon understood that his visitswere not intended for that lady, though they were the persons who keptup the conversation. He came for the sake of the daughter. They calledher Kaela. Her name was really Karen Malena, and these two names hadbeen contracted into the one name Kaela. She was really beautiful; butsome said she was rather dull, and slept late of a morning.

"She has been accustomed to that," her mother said. "She is abeauty, and they are always easily tired. She does sleep ratherlate; but that makes her eyes so clear."

What power seemed to lie in the depths of those dark eyes! Theyoung man felt the truth of the proverb, "Still waters run deep:"and his heart had sunk into their depths. He often talked of hisadventures, and the mamma was as simple and eager in her questionsas on the first evening they met. It was a pleasure to hear Alfreddescribe anything. He showed them colored plates of Naples, andspoke of excursions to Mount Vesuvius, and the eruptions of firefrom it. The naval officer's widow had never heard of them before.

"Good heavens!" she exclaimed. "So that is a burning mountain; butis it not very dangerous to the people who live near it?"

"Whole cities have been destroyed," he replied; "for instance,Herculaneum and Pompeii."

"Oh, the poor people! And you saw all that with your own eyes?"

"No; I did not see any of the eruptions which are represented inthose pictures; but I will show you a sketch of my own, whichrepresents an eruption I once saw."

He placed a pencil sketch on the table; and mamma, who had beenover-powered with the appearance of the colored plates, threw a glanceat the pale drawing and cried in astonishment, "What, did you see itthrow up white fire?"

For a moment, Alfred's respect for Kaela's mamma underwent asudden shock, and lessened considerably; but, dazzled by the lightwhich surrounded Kaela, he soon found it quite natural that the oldlady should have no eye for color. After all, it was of very littleconsequence; for Kaela's mamma had the best of all possessions;namely, Kaela herself.

Alfred and Kaela were betrothed, which was a very naturalresult; and the betrothal was announced in the newspaper of the littletown. Mama purchased thirty copies of the paper, that she might cutout the paragraph and send it to friends and acquaintances. Thebetrothed pair were very happy, and the mother was happy too. She saidit seemed like connecting herself with Thorwalsden.

"You are a true successor of Thorwalsden," she said to Alfred; andit seemed to him as if, in this instance, mamma had said a cleverthing. Kaela was silent; but her eyes shone, her lips smiled, everymovement was graceful,- in fact, she was beautiful; that cannot berepeated too often. Alfred decided to take a bust of Kaela as wellas of her mother. They sat to him accordingly, and saw how hemoulded and formed the soft clay with his fingers.

"I suppose it is only on our account that you perform thiscommon-place work yourself, instead of leaving it to your servant todo all that sticking together."

"It is really necessary that I should mould the clay myself," hereplied.

"Ah, yes, you are always so polite," said mamma, with a smile; andKaela silently pressed his hand, all soiled as it was with the clay.

Then he unfolded to them both the beauties of Nature, in all herworks; he pointed out to them how, in the scale of creation, inanimatematter was inferior to animate nature; the plant above the mineral,the animal above the plant, and man above them all. He strove toshow them how the beauty of the mind could be displayed in the outwardform, and that it was the sculptor's task to seize upon that beauty ofexpression, and produce it in his works. Kaela stood silent, butnodded in approbation of what he said, while mamma-in-law made thefollowing confession:-

"It is difficult to follow you; but I go hobbling along afteryou with my thoughts, though what you say makes my head whirl roundand round. Still I contrive to lay hold on some of it."

Kaela's beauty had a firm hold on Alfred; it filled his soul,and held a mastery over him. Beauty beamed from Kaela's every feature,glittered in her eyes, lurked in the corners of her mouth, andpervaded every movement of her agile fingers. Alfred, the sculptor,saw this. He spoke only to her, thought only of her, and the twobecame one; and so it may be said she spoke much, for he was alwaystalking to her; and he and she were one. Such was the betrothal, andthen came the wedding, with bride's-maids and wedding presents, allduly mentioned in the wedding speech. Mamma-in-law had set upThorwalsden's bust at the end of the table, attired in adressing-gown; it was her fancy that he should be a guest. Songswere sung, and cheers given; for it was a gay wedding, and they were ahandsome pair. "Pygmalion loved his Galatea," said one of the songs.

"Ah, that is some of your mythologies," said mamma-in-law.

Next day the youthful pair started for Copenhagen, where they wereto live; mamma-in-law accompanied them, to attend to the "coarsework," as she always called the domestic arrangements. Kaela lookedlike a doll in a doll's house, for everything was bright and new,and so fine. There they sat, all three; and as for Alfred, a proverbmay describe his position- he looked like a swan amongst the geese.The magic of form had enchanted him; he had looked at the casketwithout caring to inquire what it contained, and that omission oftenbrings the greatest unhappiness into married life. The casket may beinjured, the gilding may fall off, and then the purchaser regretshis bargain.

In a large party it is very disagreeable to find a button givingway, with no studs at hand to fall back upon; but it is worse still ina large company to be conscious that your wife and mother-in-law aretalking nonsense, and that you cannot depend upon yourself toproduce a little ready wit to carry off the stupidity of the wholeaffair.

The young married pair often sat together hand in hand; he wouldtalk, but she could only now and then let fall a word in the samemelodious voice, the same bell-like tones. It was a mental relief whenSophy, one of her friends, came to pay them a visit. Sophy was not,pretty. She was, however, quite free from any physical deformity,although Kaela used to say she was a little crooked; but no eye,save an intimate acquaintance, would have noticed it. She was a verysensible girl, yet it never occurred to her that she might be adangerous person in such a house. Her appearance created a newatmosphere in the doll's house, and air was really required, theyall owned that. They felt the want of a change of air, andconsequently the young couple and their mother travelled to Italy.

"Thank heaven we are at home again within our own four walls,"said mamma-in-law and daughter both, on their return after a year'sabsence.

"There is no real pleasure in travelling," said mamma; "to tellthe truth, it's very wearisome; I beg pardon for saying so. I was soonvery tired of it, although I had my children with me; and, besides,it's very expensive work travelling, very expensive. And all thosegalleries one is expected to see, and the quantity of things you areobliged to run after! It must be done, for very shame; you are sure tobe asked when you come back if you have seen everything, and will mostlikely be told that you've omitted to see what was best worth seeingof all. I got tired at last of those endless Madonnas; I began tothink I was turning into a Madonna myself."

"And then the living, mamma," said Kaela.

"Yes, indeed," she replied, "no such a thing as a respectable meatsoup- their cookery is miserable stuff."

The journey had also tired Kaela; but she was always fatigued,that was the worst of it. So they sent for Sophy, and she was takeninto the house to reside with them, and her presence there was a greatadvantage. Mamma-in-law acknowledged that Sophy was not only aclever housewife, but well-informed and accomplished, though thatcould hardly be expected in a person of her limited means. She wasalso a generous-hearted, faithful girl; she showed that thoroughlywhile Kaela lay sick, fading away. When the casket is everything,the casket should be strong, or else all is over. And all was overwith the casket, for Kaela died.

"She was beautiful," said her mother; "she was quite differentfrom the beauties they call 'antiques,' for they are so damaged. Abeauty ought to be perfect, and Kaela was a perfect beauty."

Alfred wept, and mamma wept, and they both wore mourning. Theblack dress suited mamma very well, and she wore mourning the longest.She had also to experience another grief in seeing Alfred marry again,marry Sophy, who was nothing at all to look at. "He's gone to the veryextreme," said mamma-in-law; "he has gone from the most beautiful tothe ugliest, and he has forgotten his first wife. Men have noconstancy. My husband was a very different man,- but then he diedbefore me."

"'Pygmalion loved his Galatea,' was in the song they sung at myfirst wedding," said Alfred; "I once fell in love with a beautifulstatue, which awoke to life in my arms; but the kindred soul, which isa gift from heaven, the angel who can feel and sympathize with andelevate us, I have not found and won till now. You came, Sophy, not inthe glory of outward beauty, though you are even fairer than isnecessary. The chief thing still remains. You came to teach thesculptor that his work is but dust and clay only, an outward form madeof a material that decays, and that what we should seek to obtain isthe ethereal essence of mind and spirit. Poor Kaela! our life wasbut as a meeting by the way-side; in yonder world, where we shall knoweach other from a union of mind, we shall be but mere acquaintances."

"That was not a loving speech," said Sophy, "nor spoken like aChristian. In a future state, where there is neither marrying norgiving in marriage, but where, as you say, souls are attracted to eachother by sympathy; there everything beautiful develops itself, andis raised to a higher state of existence: her soul will acquire suchcompleteness that it may harmonize with yours, even more than mine,and you will then once more utter your first rapturous exclamationof your love, 'Beautiful, most beautiful!'"

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

BY THE ALMSHOUSE WINDOW

   by Hans Christian Andersen

NEAR the grass-covered rampart which encircles Copenhagen lies agreat red house. Balsams and other flowers greet us from the long rowsof windows in the house, whose interior is sufficientlypoverty-stricken; and poor and old are the people who inhabit it.The building is the Warton Almshouse.

Look! at the window there leans an old maid. She plucks thewithered leaf from the balsam, and looks at the grass-covered rampart,on which many children are playing. What is the old maid thinkingof? A whole life drama is unfolding itself before her inward gaze.

"The poor little children, how happy they are- how merrily theyplay and romp together! What red cheeks and what angels' eyes! butthey have no shoes nor stockings. They dance on the green rampart,just on the place where, according to the old story, the ground alwayssank in, and where a sportive, frolicsome child had been lured bymeans of flowers, toys and sweetmeats into an open grave ready dug forit, and which was afterwards closed over the child; and from thatmoment, the old story says, the ground gave way no longer, the moundremained firm and fast, and was quickly covered with the green turf.The little people who now play on that spot know nothing of the oldtale, else would they fancy they heard a child crying deep below theearth, and the dewdrops on each blade of grass would be to themtears of woe. Nor do they know anything of the Danish King who here,in the face of the coming foe, took an oath before all his tremblingcourtiers that he would hold out with the citizens of his capital, anddie here in his nest; they know nothing of the men who have foughthere, or of the women who from here have drenched with boiling waterthe enemy, clad in white, and 'biding in the snow to surprise thecity.

"No! the poor little ones are playing with light, childishspirits. Play on, play on, thou little maiden! Soon the years willcome- yes, those glorious years. The priestly hands have been laidon the candidates for confirmation; hand in hand they walk on thegreen rampart. Thou hast a white frock on; it has cost thy mother muchlabor, and yet it is only cut down for thee out of an old largerdress! You will also wear a red shawl; and what if it hang too fardown? People will only see how large, how very large it is. You arethinking of your dress, and of the Giver of all good- so glorious isit to wander on the green rampart!

"And the years roll by; they have no lack of dark days, but youhave your cheerful young spirit, and you have gained a friend- youknow not how. You met, oh, how often! You walk together on the rampartin the fresh spring, on the high days and holidays, when all the worldcome out to walk upon the ramparts, and all the bells of the churchsteeples seem to be singing a song of praise for the coming spring.

"Scarcely have the violets come forth, but there on the rampart,just opposite the beautiful Castle of Rosenberg, there is a treebright with the first green buds. Every year this tree sends forthfresh green shoots. Alas! It is not so with the human heart! Darkmists, more in number than those that cover the northern skies,cloud the human heart. Poor child! thy friend's bridal chamber is ablack coffin, and thou becomest an old maid. From the almshousewindow, behind the balsams, thou shalt look on the merry children atplay, and shalt see thine own history renewed."

And that is the life drama that passes before the old maid whileshe looks out upon the rampart, the green, sunny rampart, where thechildren, with their red cheeks and bare shoeless feet, arerejoicing merrily, like the other free little birds.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   CHILDREN'S PRATTLE

   by Hans Christian Andersen

AT a rich merchant's house there was a children's party, and thechildren of rich and great people were there. The merchant was alearned man, for his father had sent him to college, and he had passedhis examination. His father had been at first only a cattle dealer,but always honest and industrious, so that he had made money, andhis son, the merchant, had managed to increase his store. Clever as hewas, he had also a heart; but there was less said of his heart than ofhis money. All descriptions of people visited at the merchant's house,well born, as well as intellectual, and some who possessed neitherof these recommendations.

Now it was a children's party, and there was children's prattle,which always is spoken freely from the heart. Among them was abeautiful little girl, who was terribly proud; but this had beentaught her by the servants, and not by her parents, who were far toosensible people.

Her father was groom of the Chambers, which is a high office atcourt, and she knew it. "I am a child of the court," she said; now shemight just as well have been a child of the cellar, for no one canhelp his birth; and then she told the other children that she waswell-born, and said that no one who was not well-born could rise inthe world. It was no use to read and be industrious, for if a personwas not well-born, he could never achieve anything. "And those whosenames end with 'sen,'" said she, "can never be anything at all. Wemust put our arms akimbo, and make the elbow quite pointed, so as tokeep these 'sen' people at a great distance." And then she stuck outher pretty little arms, and made the elbows quite pointed, to show howit was to be done; and her little arms were very pretty, for she was asweet-looking child.

But the little daughter of the merchant became very angry atthis speech, for her father's name was Petersen, and she knew that thename ended in "sen," and therefore she said as proudly as she could,"But my papa can buy a hundred dollars' worth of bonbons, and givethem away to children. Can your papa do that?"

"Yes; and my papa," said the little daughter of the editor of apaper, "my papa can put your papa and everybody's papa into thenewspaper. All sorts of people are afraid of him, my mamma says, forhe can do as he likes with the paper." And the little maiden lookedexceedingly proud, as if she had been a real princess, who may beexpected to look proud.

But outside the door, which stood ajar, was a poor boy, peepingthrough the crack of the door. He was of such a lowly station thathe had not been allowed even to enter the room. He had been turningthe spit for the cook, and she had given him permission to standbehind the door and peep in at the well-dressed children, who werehaving such a merry time within; and for him that was a great deal."Oh, if I could be one of them," thought he, and then he heard whatwas said about names, which was quite enough to make him more unhappy.His parents at home had not even a penny to spare to buy anewspaper, much less could they write in one; and worse than all,his father's name, and of course his own, ended in "sen," andtherefore he could never turn out well, which was a very sadthought. But after all, he had been born into the world, and thestation of life had been chosen for him, therefore he must be content.

And this is what happened on that evening.

Many years passed, and most of the children became grown-uppersons.

There stood a splendid house in the town, filled with all kinds ofbeautiful and valuable objects. Everybody wished to see it, and peopleeven came in from the country round to be permitted to view thetreasures it contained.

Which of the children whose prattle we have described, couldcall this house his own? One would suppose it very easy to guess.No, no; it is not so very easy. The house belonged to the poorlittle boy who had stood on that night behind the door. He hadreally become something great, although his name ended in "sen,"-for it was Thorwaldsen.

And the three other children- the children of good birth, ofmoney, and of intellectual pride,- well, they were respected andhonored in the world, for they had been well provided for by birth andposition, and they had no cause to reproach themselves with whatthey had thought and spoken on that evening long ago, for, afterall, it was mere "children's prattle."

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   DELAYING IS NOT FORGETTING

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was an old mansion surrounded by a marshy ditch with adrawbridge which was but seldom let down:- not all guests are goodpeople. Under the roof were loopholes to shoot through, and to pourdown boiling water or even molten lead on the enemy, should heapproach. Inside the house the rooms were very high and had ceilingsof beams, and that was very useful considering the great deal of smokewhich rose up from the chimney fire where the large, damp logs of woodsmouldered. On the walls hung pictures of knights in armour andproud ladies in gorgeous dresses; the most stately of all walked aboutalive. She was called Meta Mogen; she was the mistress of the house,to her belonged the castle.

Towards the evening robbers came; they killed three of herpeople and also the yard-dog, and attached Mrs. Meta to the kennelby the chain, while they themselves made good cheer in the hall anddrank the wine and the good ale out of her cellar. Mrs. Meta was nowon the chain, she could not even bark.

But lo! the servant of one of the robbers secretly approached her;they must not see it, otherwise they would have killed him.

"Mrs. Meta Mogen," said the fellow, "do you still remember howmy father, when your husband was still alive, had to ride on thewooden horse? You prayed for him, but it was no good, he was to rideuntil his limbs were paralysed; but you stole down to him, as Isteal now to you, you yourself put little stones under each of hisfeet that he might have support, nobody saw it, or they pretendednot to see it, for you were then the young gracious mistress. Myfather has told me this, and I have not forgotten it! Now I willfree you, Mrs. Meta Mogen!"

Then they pulled the horses out of the stable and rode off in rainand wind to obtain the assistance of friends.

"Thus the small service done to the old man was richlyrewarded!" said Meta Mogen.

"Delaying is not forgetting," said the fellow.

The robbers were hanged.

There was an old mansion, it is still there; it did not belongto Mrs. Meta Mogen, it belonged to another old noble family.

We are now in the present time. The sun is shining on the giltknob of the tower, little wooded islands lie like bouquets on thewater, and wild swans are swimming round them. In the garden growroses; the mistress of the house is herself the finest rose petal, shebeams with joy, the joy of good deeds: however, not done in the wideworld, but in her heart, and what is preserved there is not forgotten.Delaying is not forgetting!

Now she goes from the mansion to a little peasant hut in thefield. Therein lives a poor paralysed girl; the window of her littleroom looks northward, the sun does not enter here. The girl can onlysee a small piece of field which is surrounded by a high fence. Butto-day the sun shines here- the warm, beautiful sun of God is withinthe little room; it comes from the south through the new window, whereformerly the wall was.

The paralysed girl sits in the warm sunshine and can see thewood and the lake; the world had become so large, so beautiful, andonly through a single word from the kind mistress of the mansion.

"The word was so easy, the deed so small," she said, "the joy itafforded me was infinitely great and sweet!"

And therefore she does many a good deed, thinks of all in thehumble cottages and in the rich mansions, where there are alsoafflicted ones. It is concealed and hidden, but God does not forgetit. Delayed is not forgotten!

An old house stood there; it was in the large town with its busytraffic. There are rooms and halls in it, but we do not enter them, weremain in the kitchen, where it is warm and light, clean and tidy; thecopper utensils are shining, the table as if polished with beeswax;the sink looks like a freshly scoured meatboard. All this a singleservant has done, and yet she has time to spare as if she wished to goto church; she wears a bow on her cap, a black bow, that signifiesmourning. But she has no one to mourn, neither father nor mother,neither relations nor sweetheart. She is a poor girl. One day shewas engaged to a poor fellow; they loved each other dearly.

One day he came to her and said:

"We both have nothing! The rich widow over the way in the basementhas made advances to me; she will make me rich, but you are in myheart; what do you advise me to do?"

"I advise you to do what you think will turn out to yourhappiness," said the girl. "Be kind and good to her, but rememberthis; from the hour we part we shall never see each other again."

Years passed; then one day she met the old friend and sweetheartin the street; he looked ill and miserable, and she could not helpasking him, "How are you?"

"Rich and prospering in every respect," he said; "the woman isbrave and good, but you are in my heart. I have fought the battle,it will soon be ended; we shall not see each other again now untilwe meet before God!"

A week has passed; this morning his death was in the newspaper,that is the reason of the girl's mourning! Her old sweetheart isdead and has left a wife and three step-children, as the paper says;it sounds as if there is a crack, but the metal is pure.

The black bow signifies mourning, the girl's face points to thesame in a still higher degree; it is preserved in the heart and willnever be forgotten. Delaying is not forgetting!

These are three stories you see, three leaves on the same stalk.Do you wish for some more trefoil leaves? In the little heartbookare many more of them. Delaying is not forgetting!

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 EVERYTHING IN THE RIGHT PLACE

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IT is more than a hundred years ago! At the border of the wood,near a large lake, stood the old mansion: deep ditches surrounded iton every side, in which reeds and bulrushes grew. Close by thedrawbridge, near the gate, there was an old willow tree, which bentover the reeds.

From the narrow pass came the sound of bugles and the trampling ofhorses' feet; therefore a little girl who was watching the geesehastened to drive them away from the bridge, before the wholehunting party came galloping up; they came, however, so quickly,that the girl, in order to avoid being run over, placed herself on oneof the high corner-stones of the bridge. She was still half a childand very delicately built; she had bright blue eyes, and a gentle,sweet expression. But such things the baron did not notice; while hewas riding past the little goose-girl, he reversed his hunting crop,and in rough play gave her such a push with it that she fellbackward into the ditch.

"Everything in the right place!" he cried. "Into the ditch withyou."

Then he burst out laughing, for that he called fun; the othersjoined in- the whole party shouted and cried, while the hounds barked.

While the poor girl was falling she happily caught one of thebranches of the willow tree, by the help of which she held herselfover the water, and as soon as the baron with his company and the dogshad disappeared through the gate, the girl endeavoured to scramble up,but the branch broke off, and she would have fallen backward among therushes, had not a strong hand from above seized her at this moment. Itwas the hand of a pedlar; he had witnessed what had happened from ashort distance, and now hastened to assist her.

"Everything in the right place," he said, imitating the noblebaron, and pulling the little maid up to the dry ground. He wishedto put the branch back in the place it had been broken off, but itis not possible to put everything in the right place;" therefore hestuck the branch into the soft ground.

"Grow and thrive if you can, and produce a good flute for themyonder at the mansion," he said; it would have given him greatpleasure to see the noble baron and his companions well thrashed. Thenhe entered the castle- but not the banqueting hall; he was toohumble for that. No; he went to the servants' hall. The men-servantsand maids looked over his stock of articles and bargained with him;loud crying and screaming were heard from the master's table above:they called it singing- indeed, they did their best. Laughter andthe howls of dogs were heard through the open windows: there they werefeasting and revelling; wine and strong old ale were foaming in theglasses and jugs; the favourite dogs ate with their masters; now andthen the squires kissed one of these animals, after having wiped itsmouth first with the tablecloth. They ordered the pedlar to come up,but only to make fun of him. The wine had got into their heads, andreason had left them. They poured beer into a stocking that he coulddrink with them, but quick. That's what they called fun, and it madethem laugh. Then meadows, peasants, and farmyards were staked on onecard and lost.

"Everything in the right place!" the pedlar said when he had atlast safely got out of Sodom and Gomorrah, as he called it. "Theopen high road is my right place; up there I did not feel at ease."

The little maid, who was still watching the geese, nodded kindlyto him as he passed through the gate.

Days and weeks passed, and it was seen that the brokenwillow-branch which the peddlar had stuck into the ground near theditch remained fresh and green- nay, it even put forth fresh twigs;the little goose-girl saw that the branch had taken root, and was verypleased; the tree, so she said, was now her tree. While the tree wasadvancing, everything else at the castle was going backward, throughfeasting and gambling, for these are two rollers upon which nobodystands safely. Less than six years afterwards the baron passed outof his castle-gate a poor beggar, while the baronial seat had beenbought by a rich tradesman. He was the very pedlar they had made funof and poured beer into a stocking for him to drink; but honesty andindustry bring one forward, and now the pedlar was the possessor ofthe baronial estate. From that time forward no card-playing waspermitted there.

"That's a bad pastime," he said; "when the devil saw the Bible forthe first time he wanted to produce a caricature in opposition toit, and invented card-playing."

The new proprietor of the estate took a wife, and whom did hetake?- The little goose-girl, who had always remained good and kind,and who looked as beautiful in her new clothes as if she had been alady of high birth. And how did all this come about? That would be toolong a tale to tell in our busy time, but it really happened, andthe most important events have yet to be told.

It was pleasant and cheerful to live in the old place now: themother superintended the household, and the father looked after thingsout-of-doors, and they were indeed very prosperous.

Where honesty leads the way, prosperity is sure to follow. The oldmansion was repaired and painted, the ditches were cleaned andfruit-trees planted; all was homely and pleasant, and the floorswere as white and shining as a pasteboard. In the long winter eveningsthe mistress and her maids sat at the spinning-wheel in the largehall; every Sunday the counsellor- this title the pedlar had obtained,although only in his old days- read aloud a portion from the Bible.The children (for they had children) all received the besteducation, but they were not all equally clever, as is the case in allfamilies.

In the meantime the willow tree near the drawbridge had grown upinto a splendid tree, and stood there, free, and was never clipped."It is our genealogical tree," said the old people to theirchildren, "and therefore it must be honoured."

A hundred years had elapsed. It was in our own days; the lakehad been transformed into marsh land; the whole baronial seat had,as it were, disappeared. A pool of water near some ruined walls wasthe only remainder of the deep ditches; and here stood a magnificentold tree with overhanging branches- that was the genealogical tree.Here it stood, and showed how beautiful a willow can look if onedoes not interfere with it. The trunk, it is true, was cleft in themiddle from the root to the crown; the storms had bent it a little,but it still stood there, and out of every crevice and cleft, in whichwind and weather had carried mould, blades of grass and flowers sprangforth. Especially above, where the large boughs parted, there wasquite a hanging garden, in which wild raspberries and hart's-tongueferns throve, and even a little mistletoe had taken root, and grewgracefully in the old willow branches, which were reflected in thedark water beneath when the wind blew the chickweed into the corner ofthe pool. A footpath which led across the fields passed close by theold tree. High up, on the woody hillside, stood the new mansion. Ithad a splendid view, and was large and magnificent; its window paneswere so clear that one might have thought there were none there atall. The large flight of steps which led to the entrance looked like abower covered with roses and broad-leaved plants. The lawn was asgreen as if each blade of grass was cleaned separately morning andevening. Inside, in the hall, valuable oil paintings were hanging onthe walls. Here stood chairs and sofas covered with silk and velvet,which could be easily rolled about on castors; there were tableswith polished marble tops, and books bound in morocco with gilt edges.Indeed, well-to-do and distinguished people lived here; it was thedwelling of the baron and his family. Each article was in keeping withits surroundings. "Everything in the right place" was the mottoaccording to which they also acted here, and therefore all thepaintings which had once been the honour and glory of the oldmansion were now hung up in the passage which led to the servants'rooms. It was all old lumber, especially two portraits- onerepresenting a man in a scarlet coat with a wig, and the other alady with powdered and curled hair holding a rose in her hand, each ofthem being surrounded by a large wreath of willow branches. Bothportraits had many holes in them, because the baron's sons used thetwo old people as targets for their crossbows. They represented thecounsellor and his wife, from whom the whole family descended. "Butthey did not properly belong to our family," said one of the boys; "hewas a pedlar and she kept the geese. They were not like papa andmamma." The portraits were old lumber, and "everything in its rightplace." That was why the great-grandparents had been hung up in thepassage leading to the servants' rooms.

The son of the village pastor was tutor at the mansion. One day hewent for a walk across the fields with his young pupils and theirelder sister, who had lately been confirmed. They walked along theroad which passed by the old willow tree, and while they were on theroad she picked a bunch of field-flowers. "Everything in the rightplace," and indeed the bunch looked very beautiful. At the same timeshe listened to all that was said, and she very much liked to hear thepastor's son speak about the elements and of the great men and womenin history. She had a healthy mind, noble in thought and deed, andwith a heart full of love for everything that God had created. Theystopped at the old willow tree, as the youngest of the baron's sonswished very much to have a flute from it, such as had been cut for himfrom other willow trees; the pastor's son broke a branch off. "Oh,pray do not do it!" said the young lady; but it was already done."That is our famous old tree. I love it very much. They often laugh atme at home about it, but that does not matter. There is a storyattached to this tree." And now she told him all that we alreadyknow about the tree- the old mansion, the pedlar and the goose-girlwho had met there for the first time, and had become the ancestorsof the noble family to which the young lady belonged.

"They did not like to be knighted, the good old people," she said;"their motto was 'everything in the right place,' and it would notbe right, they thought, to purchase a title for money. My grandfather,the first baron, was their son. They say he was a very learned man,a great favourite with the princes and princesses, and was invitedto all court festivities. The others at home love him best; but, Ido not know why, there seemed to me to be something about the oldcouple that attracts my heart! How homely, how patriarchal, it musthave been in the old mansion, where the mistress sat at thespinning-wheel with her maids, while her husband read aloud out of theBible!"

"They must have been excellent, sensible people," said thepastor's son. And with this the conversation turned naturally tonoblemen and commoners; from the manner in which the tutor spoke aboutthe significance of being noble, it seemed almost as if he did notbelong to a commoner's family.

"It is good fortune to be of a family who have distinguishedthemselves, and to possess as it were a spur in oneself to advanceto all that is good. It is a splendid thing to belong to a noblefamily, whose name serves as a card of admission to the highestcircles. Nobility is a distinction; it is a gold coin that bears thestamp of its own value. It is the fallacy of the time, and manypoets express it, to say that all that is noble is bad and stupid, andthat, on the contrary, the lower one goes among the poor, the morebrilliant virtues one finds. I do not share this opinion, for it iswrong. In the upper classes one sees many touchingly beautiful traits;my own mother has told me of such, and I could mention several. Oneday she was visiting a nobleman's house in town; my grandmother, Ibelieve, had been the lady's nurse when she was a child. My mother andthe nobleman were alone in the room, when he suddenly noticed an oldwoman on crutches come limping into the courtyard; she came everySunday to carry a gift away with her.

"'There is the poor old woman,' said the nobleman; 'it is sodifficult for her to walk.'

"My mother had hardly understood what he said before hedisappeared from the room, and went downstairs, in order to save herthe troublesome walk for the gift she came to fetch. Of course this isonly a little incident, but it has its good sound like the poorwidow's two mites in the Bible, the sound which echoes in the depth ofevery human heart; and this is what the poet ought to show and pointout- more especially in our own time he ought to sing of this; it doesgood, it mitigates and reconciles! But when a man, simply because heis of noble birth and possesses a genealogy, stands on his hind legsand neighs in the street like an Arabian horse, and says when acommoner has been in a room: 'Some people from the street have beenhere,' there nobility is decaying; it has become a mask of the kindthat Thespis created, and it is amusing when such a person isexposed in satire."

Such was the tutor's speech; it was a little long, but while hedelivered it he had finished cutting the flute.

There was a large party at the mansion; many guests from theneighbourhood and from the capital had arrived. There were ladies withtasteful and with tasteless dresses; the big hall was quite crowdedwith people. The clergymen stood humbly together in a corner, andlooked as if they were preparing for a funeral, but it was a festival-only the amusement had not yet begun. A great concert was to takeplace, and that is why the baron's young son had brought his willowflute with him; but he could not make it sound, nor could hisfather, and therefore the flute was good for nothing.

There was music and songs of the kind which delight most thosethat perform them; otherwise quite charming!

"Are you an artist?" said a cavalier, the son of his father;"you play on the flute, you have made it yourself; it is genius thatrules- the place of honour is due to you."

"Certainly not! I only advance with the time, and that of courseone can't help."

"I hope you will delight us all with the little instrument- willyou not?" Thus saying he handed to the tutor the flute which hadbeen cut from the willow tree by the pool; and then announced in aloud voice that the tutor wished to perform a solo on the flute.They wished to tease him- that was evident, and therefore the tutordeclined to play, although he could do so very well. They urged andrequested him, however, so long, that at last he took up the flute andplaced it to his lips.

That was a marvellous flute! Its sound was as thrilling as thewhistle of a steam engine; in fact it was much stronger, for itsounded and was heard in the yard, in the garden, in the wood, andmany miles round in the country; at the same time a storm rose androared; "Everything in the right place." And with this the baron, asif carried by the wind, flew out of the hall straight into theshepherd's cottage, and the shepherd flew- not into the hall,thither he could not come- but into the servants' hall, among thesmart footmen who were striding about in silk stockings; these haughtymenials looked horror-struck that such a person ventured to sit attable with them. But in the hall the baron's daughter flew to theplace of honour at the end of the table- she was worthy to sitthere; the pastor's son had the seat next to her; the two sat there asif they were a bridal pair. An old Count, belonging to one of theoldest families of the country, remained untouched in his place ofhonour; the flute was just, and it is one's duty to be so. Thesharp-tongued cavalier who had caused the flute to be played, andwho was the child of his parents, flew headlong into the fowl-house,but not he alone.

The flute was heard at the distance of a mile, and strangeevents took place. A rich banker's family, who were driving in a coachand four, were blown out of it, and could not even find room behind itwith their footmen. Two rich farmers who had in our days shot uphigher than their own corn-fields, were flung into the ditch; it was adangerous flute. Fortunately it burst at the first sound, and that wasa good thing, for then it was put back into its owner's pocket- "itsright place."

The next day, nobody spoke a word about what had taken place; thusoriginated the phrase, "to pocket the flute." Everything was againin its usual order, except that the two old pictures of the peddlarand the goose-girl were hanging in the banqueting-hall. There theywere on the wall as if blown up there; and as a real expert saidthat they were painted by a master's hand, they remained there andwere restored. "Everything in the right place," and to this it willcome. Eternity is long, much longer indeed than this story.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

  GRANDMOTHER

   by Hans Christian AndersenGRANDMOTHER

GRANDMOTHER is very old, her face is wrinkled, and her hair isquite white; but her eyes are like two stars, and they have a mild,gentle expression in them when they look at you, which does yougood. She wears a dress of heavy, rich silk, with large flowers workedon it; and it rustles when she moves. And then she can tell the mostwonderful stories. Grandmother knows a great deal, for she was alivebefore father and mother- that's quite certain. She has a hymn-bookwith large silver clasps, in which she often reads; and in the book,between the leaves, lies a rose, quite flat and dry; it is not sopretty as the roses which are standing in the glass, and yet shesmiles at it most pleasantly, and tears even come into her eyes. "Iwonder why grandmother looks at the withered flower in the old bookthat way? Do you know?" Why, when grandmother's tears fall upon therose, and she is looking at it, the rose revives, and fills the roomwith its fragrance; the walls vanish as in a mist, and all aroundher is the glorious green wood, where in summer the sunlight streamsthrough thick foliage; and grandmother, why she is young again, acharming maiden, fresh as a rose, with round, rosy cheeks, fair,bright ringlets, and a figure pretty and graceful; but the eyes, thosemild, saintly eyes, are the same,- they have been left to grandmother.At her side sits a young man, tall and strong; he gives her a rose andshe smiles. Grandmother cannot smile like that now. Yes, she issmiling at the memory of that day, and many thoughts and recollectionsof the past; but the handsome young man is gone, and the rose haswithered in the old book, and grandmother is sitting there, again anold woman, looking down upon the withered rose in the book.

Grandmother is dead now. She had been sitting in her arm-chair,telling us a long, beautiful tale; and when it was finished, shesaid she was tired, and leaned her head back to sleep awhile. We couldhear her gentle breathing as she slept; gradually it became quieterand calmer, and on her countenance beamed happiness and peace. Itwas as if lighted up with a ray of sunshine. She smiled once more, andthen people said she was dead. She was laid in a black coffin, lookingmild and beautiful in the white folds of the shrouded linen, thoughher eyes were closed; but every wrinkle had vanished, her hairlooked white and silvery, and around her mouth lingered a sweet smile.We did not feel at all afraid to look at the corpse of her who hadbeen such a dear, good grandmother. The hymn-book, in which the rosestill lay, was placed under her head, for so she had wished it; andthen they buried grandmother.

On the grave, close by the churchyard wall, they planted arose-tree; it was soon full of roses, and the nightingale sat amongthe flowers, and sang over the grave. From the organ in the churchsounded the music and the words of the beautiful psalms, which werewritten in the old book under the head of the dead one.

The moon shone down upon the grave, but the dead was not there;every child could go safely, even at night, and pluck a rose fromthe tree by the churchyard wall. The dead know more than we do who areliving. They know what a terror would come upon us if such a strangething were to happen, as the appearance of a dead person among us.They are better off than we are; the dead return no more. The earthhas been heaped on the coffin, and it is earth only that lies withinit. The leaves of the hymn-book are dust; and the rose, with all itsrecollections, has crumbled to dust also. But over the grave freshroses bloom, the nightingale sings, and the organ sounds and therestill lives a remembrance of old grandmother, with the loving,gentle eyes that always looked young. Eyes can never die. Ours willonce again behold dear grandmother, young and beautiful as when, forthe first time, she kissed the fresh, red rose, that is now dust inthe grave.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 HOLGER DANSKE

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IN Denmark there stands an old castle named Kronenburg, close bythe Sound of Elsinore, where large ships, both English, Russian, andPrussian, pass by hundreds every day. And they salute the old castlewith cannons, "Boom, boom," which is as if they said, "Good-day."And the cannons of the old castle answer "Boom," which means "Manythanks." In winter no ships sail by, for the whole Sound is coveredwith ice as far as the Swedish coast, and has quite the appearanceof a high-road. The Danish and the Swedish flags wave, and Danes andSwedes say, "Good-day," and "Thank you" to each other, not withcannons, but with a friendly shake of the hand; and they exchangewhite bread and biscuits with each other, because foreign articlestaste the best.

But the most beautiful sight of all is the old castle ofKronenburg, where Holger Danske sits in the deep, dark cellar, intowhich no one goes. He is clad in iron and steel, and rests his head onhis strong arm; his long beard hangs down upon the marble table,into which it has become firmly rooted; he sleeps and dreams, but inhis dreams he sees everything that happens in Denmark. On eachChristmas-eve an angel comes to him and tells him that all he hasdreamed is true, and that he may go to sleep again in peace, asDenmark is not yet in any real danger; but should danger ever come,then Holger Danske will rouse himself, and the table will burstasunder as he draws out his beard. Then he will come forth in hisstrength, and strike a blow that shall sound in all the countries ofthe world.

An old grandfather sat and told his little grandson all this aboutHolger Danske, and the boy knew that what his grandfather told himmust be true. As the old man related this story, he was carving animage in wood to represent Holger Danske, to be fastened to the prowof a ship; for the old grandfather was a carver in wood, that is,one who carved figures for the heads of ships, according to thenames given to them. And now he had carved Holger Danske, who stoodthere erect and proud, with his long beard, holding in one hand hisbroad battle-axe, while with the other he leaned on the Danish arms.The old grandfather told the little boy a great deal about Danishmen and women who had distinguished themselves in olden times, so thathe fancied he knew as much even as Holger Danske himself, who, afterall, could only dream; and when the little fellow went to bed, hethought so much about it that he actually pressed his chin against thecounterpane, and imagined that he had a long beard which had becomerooted to it. But the old grandfather remained sitting at his work andcarving away at the last part of it, which was the Danish arms. Andwhen he had finished he looked at the whole figure, and thought of allhe had heard and read, and what he had that evening related to hislittle grandson. Then he nodded his head, wiped his spectacles and putthem on, and said, "Ah, yes; Holger Danske will not appear in mylifetime, but the boy who is in bed there may very likely live tosee him when the event really comes to pass." And the oldgrandfather nodded again; and the more he looked at Holger Danske, themore satisfied he felt that he had carved a good image of him. Itseemed to glow with the color of life; the armor glittered like ironand steel. The hearts in the Danish arms grew more and more red; whilethe lions, with gold crowns on their heads, were leaping up. "Thatis the most beautiful coat of arms in the world," said the old man."The lions represent strength; and the hearts, gentleness and love."And as he gazed on the uppermost lion, he thought of King Canute,who chained great England to Denmark's throne; and he looked at thesecond lion, and thought of Waldemar, who untied Denmark and conqueredthe Vandals. The third lion reminded him of Margaret, who unitedDenmark, Sweden, and Norway. But when he gazed at the red hearts,their colors glowed more deeply, even as flames, and his memoryfollowed each in turn. The first led him to a dark, narrow prison,in which sat a prisoner, a beautiful woman, daughter of Christianthe Fourth, Eleanor Ulfeld, and the flame became a rose on herbosom, and its blossoms were not more pure than the heart of thisnoblest and best of all Danish women. "Ah, yes; that is indeed a nobleheart in the Danish arms," said the grandfather. and his spiritfollowed the second flame, which carried him out to sea, where cannonsroared and the ships lay shrouded in smoke, and the flaming heartattached itself to the breast of Hvitfeldt in the form of the ribbonof an order, as he blew himself and his ship into the air in orderto save the fleet. And the third flame led him to Greenland's wretchedhuts, where the preacher, Hans Egede, ruled with love in every wordand action. The flame was as a star on his breast, and added anotherheart to the Danish arms. And as the old grandfather's spirit followedthe next hovering flame, he knew whither it would lead him. In apeasant woman's humble room stood Frederick the Sixth, writing hisname with chalk on the beam. The flame trembled on his breast and inhis heart, and it was in the peasant's room that his heart becameone for the Danish arms. The old grandfather wiped his eyes, for hehad known King Frederick, with his silvery locks and his honest blueeyes, and had lived for him, and he folded his hands and remainedfor some time silent. Then his daughter came to him and said it wasgetting late, that he ought to rest for a while, and that the supperwas on the table.

"What you have been carving is very beautiful, grandfather,"said she. "Holger Danske and the old coat of arms; it seems to me asif I have seen the face somewhere."

"No, that is impossible," replied the old grandfather; "but I haveseen it, and I have tried to carve it in wood, as I have retained itin my memory. It was a long time ago, while the English fleet lay inthe roads, on the second of April, when we showed that we were true,ancient Danes. I was on board the Denmark, in Steene Bille's squadron;I had a man by my side whom even the cannon balls seemed to fear. Hesung old songs in a merry voice, and fired and fought as if he weresomething more than a man. I still remember his face, but fromwhence he came, or whither he went, I know not; no one knows. I haveoften thought it might have been Holger Danske himself, who had swamdown to us from Kronenburg to help us in the hour of danger. Thatwas my idea, and there stands his likeness."

The wooden figure threw a gigantic shadow on the wall, and even onpart of the ceiling; it seemed as if the real Holger Danske stoodbehind it, for the shadow moved; but this was no doubt caused by theflame of the lamp not burning steadily. Then the daughter-in-lawkissed the old grandfather, and led him to a large arm-chair by thetable; and she, and her husband, who was the son of the old man andthe father of the little boy who lay in bed, sat down to supper withhim. And the old grandfather talked of the Danish lions and the Danishhearts, emblems of strength and gentleness, and explained quiteclearly that there is another strength than that which lies in asword, and he pointed to a shelf where lay a number of old books,and amongst them a collection of Holberg's plays, which are muchread and are so clever and amusing that it is easy to fancy we haveknown the people of those days, who are described in them.

"He knew how to fight also," said the old man; "for he lashedthe follies and prejudices of people during his whole life."

Then the grandfather nodded to a place above the looking-glass,where hung an almanac, with a representation of the Round Tower uponit, and said "Tycho Brahe was another of those who used a sword, butnot one to cut into the flesh and bone, but to make the way of thestars of heaven clear, and plain to be understood. And then he whosefather belonged to my calling,- yes, he, the son of the oldimage-carver, he whom we ourselves have seen, with his silvery locksand his broad shoulders, whose name is known in all lands;- yes, hewas a sculptor, while I am only a carver. Holger Danske can appearin marble, so that people in all countries of the world may hear ofthe strength of Denmark. Now let us drink the health of Bertel."

But the little boy in bed saw plainly the old castle ofKronenburg, and the Sound of Elsinore, and Holger Danske, far downin the cellar, with his beard rooted to the table, and dreaming ofeverything that was passing above him.

And Holger Danske did dream of the little humble room in which theimage-carver sat; he heard all that had been said, and he nodded inhis dream, saying, "Ah, yes, remember me, you Danish people, keep mein your memory, I will come to you in the hour of need."

The bright morning light shone over Kronenburg, and the windbrought the sound of the hunting-horn across from the neighboringshores. The ships sailed by and saluted the castle with the boom ofthe cannon, and Kronenburg returned the salute, "Boom, boom." Butthe roaring cannons did not awake Holger Danske, for they meant only"Good morning," and "Thank you." They must fire in another fashionbefore he awakes; but wake he will, for there is energy yet inHolger Danske.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

IB AND LITTLE CHRISTINA

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IN the forest that extends from the banks of the Gudenau, in NorthJutland, a long way into the country, and not far from the clearstream, rises a great ridge of land, which stretches through thewood like a wall. Westward of this ridge, and not far from theriver, stands a farmhouse, surrounded by such poor land that the sandysoil shows itself between the scanty ears of rye and wheat whichgrow in it. Some years have passed since the people who lived herecultivated these fields; they kept three sheep, a pig, and two oxen;in fact they maintained themselves very well, they had quite enough tolive upon, as people generally have who are content with their lot.They even could have afforded to keep two horses, but it was asaying among the farmers in those parts, "The horse eats himselfup;" that is to say, he eats as much as he earns. Jeppe Janscultivated his fields in summer, and in the winter he made woodenshoes. He also had an assistant, a lad who understood as well as hehimself did how to make wooden shoes strong, but light, and in thefashion. They carved shoes and spoons, which paid well; therefore noone could justly call Jeppe Jans and his family poor people. LittleIb, a boy of seven years old and the only child, would sit by,watching the workmen, or cutting a stick, and sometimes his fingerinstead of the stick. But one day Ib succeeded so well in hiscarving that he made two pieces of wood look really like two littlewooden shoes, and he determined to give them as a present to LittleChristina.

"And who was Little Christina?" She was the boatman's daughter,graceful and delicate as the child of a gentleman; had she beendressed differently, no one would have believed that she lived in ahut on the neighboring heath with her father. He was a widower, andearned his living by carrying firewood in his large boat from theforest to the eel-pond and eel-weir, on the estate of Silkborg, andsometimes even to the distant town of Randers. There was no oneunder whose care he could leave Little Christina; so she was almostalways with him in his boat, or playing in the wood among theblossoming heath, or picking the ripe wild berries. Sometimes, whenher father had to go as far as the town, he would take LittleChristina, who was a year younger than Ib, across the heath to thecottage of Jeppe Jans, and leave her there. Ib and Christina agreedtogether in everything; they divided their bread and berries when theywere hungry; they were partners in digging their little gardens;they ran, and crept, and played about everywhere. Once they wandered along way into the forest, and even ventured together to climb the highridge. Another time they found a few snipes' eggs in the wood, whichwas a great event. Ib had never been on the heath where Christina'sfather lived, nor on the river; but at last came an opportunity.Christina's father invited him to go for a sail in his boat; and theevening before, he accompanied the boatman across the heath to hishouse. The next morning early, the two children were placed on the topof a high pile of firewood in the boat, and sat eating bread andwild strawberries, while Christina's father and his man drove the boatforward with poles. They floated on swiftly, for the tide was in theirfavor, passing over lakes, formed by the stream in its course;sometimes they seemed quite enclosed by reeds and water-plants, yetthere was always room for them to pass out, although the old treesoverhung the water and the old oaks stretched out their bare branches,as if they had turned up their sleeves and wished to show theirknotty, naked arms. Old alder-trees, whose roots were loosened fromthe banks, clung with their fibres to the bottom of the stream, andthe tops of the branches above the water looked like little woodyislands. The water-lilies waved themselves to and fro on the river,everything made the excursion beautiful, and at last they came tothe great eel-weir, where the water rushed through the flood-gates;and the children thought this a beautiful sight. In those days therewas no factory nor any town house, nothing but the great farm, withits scanty-bearing fields, in which could be seen a few herd ofcattle, and one or two farm laborers. The rushing of the water throughthe sluices, and the scream of the wild ducks, were almost the onlysigns of active life at Silkborg. After the firewood had beenunloaded, Christina's father bought a whole bundle of eels and asucking-pig, which were all placed in a basket in the stern of theboat. Then they returned again up the stream; and as the wind wasfavorable, two sails were hoisted, which carried the boat on as wellas if two horses had been harnessed to it. As they sailed on, theycame by chance to the place where the boatman's assistant lived, ata little distance from the bank of the river. The boat was moored; andthe two men, after desiring the children to sit still, both went onshore. they obeyed this order for a very short time, and then forgotit altogether. First they peeped into the basket containing the eelsand the sucking-pig; then they must needs pull out the pig and take itin their hands, and feel it, and touch it; and as they both wantedto hold it at the same time, the consequence was that they let it fallinto the water, and the pig sailed away with the stream.

Here was a terrible disaster. Ib jumped ashore, and ran a littledistance from the boat.

"Oh, take me with you," cried Christina; and she sprang after him.In a few minutes they found themselves deep in a thicket, and could nolonger see the boat or the shore. They ran on a little farther, andthen Christina fell down, and began to cry.

Ib helped her up, and said, "Never mind; follow me. Yonder isthe house." But the house was not yonder; and they wandered stillfarther, over the dry rustling leaves of the last year, and treadingon fallen branches that crackled under their little feet; then theyheard a loud, piercing cry, and they stood still to listen.Presently the scream of an eagle sounded through the wood; it was anugly cry, and it frightened the children; but before them, in thethickest part of the forest, grew the most beautiful blackberries,in wonderful quantities. They looked so inviting that the childrencould not help stopping; and they remained there so long eating,that their mouths and cheeks became quite black with the juice.

Presently they heard the frightful scream again, and Christinasaid, "We shall get into trouble about that pig."

"Oh, never mind," said Ib; "we will go home to my father'shouse. It is here in the wood." So they went on, but the road led themout of the way; no house could be seen, it grew dark, and the childrenwere afraid. The solemn stillness that reigned around them was now andthen broken by the shrill cries of the great horned owl and otherbirds that they knew nothing of. At last they both lost themselvesin the thicket; Christina began to cry, and then Ib cried too; and,after weeping and lamenting for some time, they stretched themselvesdown on the dry leaves and fell asleep.

The sun was high in the heavens when the two children woke. Theyfelt cold; but not far from their resting-place, on a hill, the sunwas shining through the trees. They thought if they went there theyshould be warm, and Ib fancied he should be able to see his father'shouse from such a high spot. But they were far away from home now,in quite another part of the forest. They clambered to the top ofthe rising ground, and found themselves on the edge of a declivity,which sloped down to a clear transparent lake. Great quantities offish could be seen through the clear water, sparkling in the sun'srays; they were quite surprised when they came so suddenly upon suchan unexpected sight.

Close to where they stood grew a hazel-bush, covered withbeautiful nuts. They soon gathered some, cracked them, and ate thefine young kernels, which were only just ripe. But there was anothersurprise and fright in store for them. Out of the thicket stepped atall old woman, her face quite brown, and her hair of a deep shiningblack; the whites of her eyes glittered like a Moor's; on her back shecarried a bundle, and in her hand a knotted stick. She was a gypsy.The children did not at first understand what she said. She drew outof her pocket three large nuts, in which she told them were hidden themost beautiful and lovely things in the world, for they were wishingnuts. Ib looked at her, and as she spoke so kindly, he took courage,and asked her if she would give him the nuts; and the woman gavethem to him, and then gathered some more from the bushes forherself, quite a pocket full. Ib and Christina looked at the wishingnuts with wide open eyes.

"Is there in this nut a carriage, with a pair of horses?" askedIb.

"Yes, there is a golden carriage, with two golden horses," repliedthe woman.

"Then give me that nut," said Christina; so Ib gave it to her, andthe strange woman tied up the nut for her in her handkerchief.

Ib held up another nut. "Is there, in this nut, a pretty littleneckerchief like the one Christina has on her neck?" asked Ib.

"There are ten neckerchiefs in it," she replied, "as well asbeautiful dresses, stockings, and a hat and veil."

"Then I will have that one also," said Christina; "and it is apretty one too. And then Ib gave her the second nut.

The third was a little black thing. "You may keep that one,"said Christina; "it is quite as pretty."

"What is in it?" asked Ib.

"The best of all things for you," replied the gypsy. So Ib heldthe nut very tight.

Then the woman promised to lead the children to the right path,that they might find their way home: and they went forward certainlyin quite another direction to the one they meant to take; therefore noone ought to speak against the woman, and say that she wanted to stealthe children. In the wild wood-path they met a forester who knew Ib,and, by his help, Ib and Christina reached home, where they foundevery one had been very anxious about them. They were pardoned andforgiven, although they really had both done wrong, and deserved toget into trouble; first, because they had let the sucking-pig fallinto the water; and, secondly, because they had run away. Christinawas taken back to her father's house on the heath, and Ib remainedin the farm-house on the borders of the wood, near the great landridge.

The first thing Ib did that evening was to take out of hispocket the little black nut, in which the best thing of all was saidto be enclosed. He laid it carefully between the door and thedoor-post, and then shut the door so that the nut cracked directly.But there was not much kernel to be seen; it was what we should callhollow or worm-eaten, and looked as if it had been filled with tobaccoor rich black earth. "It is just what I expected!" exclaimed Ib."How should there be room in a little nut like this for the best thingof all? Christina will find her two nuts just the same; there willbe neither fine clothes or a golden carriage in them."

Winter came; and the new year, and indeed many years passedaway; until Ib was old enough to be confirmed, and, therefore, he wentduring a whole winter to the clergyman of the nearest village to beprepared.

One day, about this time, the boatman paid a visit to Ib'sparents, and told them that Christina was going to service, and thatshe had been remarkably fortunate in obtaining a good place, with mostrespectable people. "Only think," he said, "She is going to the richinnkeeper's, at the hotel in Herning, many miles west from here. Sheis to assist the landlady in the housekeeping; and, if afterwardsshe behaves well and remains to be confirmed, the people will treather as their own daughter."

So Ib and Christina took leave of each other. People alreadycalled them "the betrothed," and at parting the girl showed Ib the twonuts, which she had taken care of ever since the time that they lostthemselves in the wood; and she told him also that the little woodenshoes he once carved for her when he was a boy, and gave her as apresent, had been carefully kept in a drawer ever since. And so theyparted.

After Ib's confirmation, he remained at home with his mother,for he had become a clever shoemaker, and in summer managed the farmfor her quite alone. His father had been dead some time, and hismother kept no farm servants. Sometimes, but very seldom, he heardof Christina, through a postillion or eel-seller who was passing.But she was well off with the rich innkeeper; and after beingconfirmed she wrote a letter to her father, in which was a kindmessage to Ib and his mother. In this letter, she mentioned that hermaster and mistress had made her a present of a beautiful new dress,and some nice under-clothes. This was, of course, pleasant news.

One day, in the following spring, there came a knock at the doorof the house where Ib's old mother lived; and when they opened it,lo and behold, in stepped the boatman and Christina. She had come topay them a visit, and to spend the day. A carriage had to come fromthe Herning hotel to the next village, and she had taken theopportunity to see her friends once more. She looked as elegant as areal lady, and wore a pretty dress, beautifully made on purpose forher. There she stood, in full dress, while Ib wore only his workingclothes. He could not utter a word; he could only seize her hand andhold it fast in his own, but he felt too happy and glad to open hislips. Christina, however, was quite at her ease; she talked andtalked, and kissed him in the most friendly manner. Even afterwards,when they were left alone, and she asked, "Did you know me again, Ib?"he still stood holding her hand, and said at last, "You are becomequite a grand lady, Christina, and I am only a rough working man;but I have often thought of you and of old times." Then theywandered up the great ridge, and looked across the stream to theheath, where the little hills were covered with the flowering broom.Ib said nothing; but before the time came for them to part, itbecame quite clear to him that Christina must be his wife: had theynot even in childhood been called the betrothed? To him it seemed asif they were really engaged to each other, although not a word hadbeen spoken on the subject. They had only a few more hours to remaintogether, for Christina was obliged to return that evening to theneighboring village, to be ready for the carriage which was to startthe next morning early for Herning. Ib and her father accompaniedher to the village. It was a fine moonlight evening; and when theyarrived, Ib stood holding Christina's hand in his, as if he couldnot let her go. His eyes brightened, and the words he uttered camewith hesitation from his lips, but from the deepest recesses of hisheart: "Christina, if you have not become too grand, and if you can becontented to live in my mother's house as my wife, we will bemarried some day. But we can wait for a while."

"Oh yes," she replied; "Let us wait a little longer, Ib. I cantrust you, for I believe that I do love you. But let me think itover." Then he kissed her lips; and so they parted.

On the way home, Ib told the boatman that he and Christina were asgood as engaged to each other; and the boatman found out that he hadalways expected it would be so, and went home with Ib that evening,and remained the night in the farmhouse; but nothing further wassaid of the engagement. During the next year, two letters passedbetween Ib and Christina. They were signed, "Faithful till death;" butat the end of that time, one day the boatman came over to see Ib, witha kind greeting from Christina. He had something else to say, whichmade him hesitate in a strange manner. At last it came out thatChristina, who had grown a very pretty girl, was more lucky than ever.She was courted and admired by every one; but her master's son, whohad been home on a visit, was so much pleased with Christina that hewished to marry her. He had a very good situation in an office atCopenhagen, and as she had also taken a liking for him, his parentswere not unwilling to consent. But Christina, in her heart, oftenthought of Ib, and knew how much he thought of her; so she feltinclined to refuse this good fortune, added the boatman. At first Ibsaid not a word, but he became as white as the wall, and shook hishead gently, and then he spoke,- "Christina must not refuse thisgood fortune."

"Then will you write a few words to her?" said the boatman.

Ib sat down to write, but he could not get on at all. The wordswere not what he wished to say, so he tore up the page. Thefollowing morning, however, a letter lay ready to be sent toChristina, and the following is what he wrote:-

"The letter written by you to your father I have read, and seefrom it that you are prosperous in everything, and that still betterfortune is in store for you. Ask your own heart, Christina, andthink over carefully what awaits you if you take me for yourhusband, for I possess very little in the world. Do not think of me orof my position; think only of your own welfare. You are bound to me byno promises; and if in your heart you have given me one, I release youfrom it. May every blessing and happiness be poured out upon you,Christina. Heaven will give me the heart's consolation.

   Ever your sincere friend, IB."

This letter was sent, and Christina received it in due time. Inthe course of the following November, her banns were published inthe church on the heath, and also in Copenhagen, where thebridegroom lived. She was taken to Copenhagen under the protectionof her future mother-in-law, because the bridegroom could not sparetime from his numerous occupations for a journey so far intoJutland. On the journey, Christina met her father at one of thevillages through which they passed, and here he took leave of her.Very little was said about the matter to Ib, and he did not refer toit; his mother, however, noticed that he had grown very silent andpensive. Thinking as he did of old times, no wonder the three nutscame into his mind which the gypsy woman had given him when a child,and of the two which he had given to Christina. These wishing nuts,after all, had proved true fortune-tellers. One had contained a gildedcarriage and noble horses, and the other beautiful clothes; all ofthese Christina would now have in her new home at Copenhagen. Her parthad come true. And for him the nut had contained only black earth. Thegypsy woman had said it was the best for him. Perhaps it was, and thisalso would be fulfilled. He understood the gypsy woman's meaningnow. The black earth- the dark grave- was the best thing for him now.

Again years passed away; not many, but they seemed long years toIb. The old innkeeper and his wife died one after the other; and thewhole of their property, many thousand dollars, was inherited by theirson. Christina could have the golden carriage now, and plenty offine clothes. During the two long years which followed, no letter camefrom Christina to her father; and when at last her father received onefrom her, it did not speak of prosperity or happiness. Poor Christina!Neither she nor her husband understood how to economize or save, andthe riches brought no blessing with them, because they had not askedfor it.

Years passed; and for many summers the heath was covered withbloom; in winter the snow rested upon it, and the rough winds blewacross the ridge under which stood Ib's sheltered home. One spring daythe sun shone brightly, and he was guiding the plough across hisfield. The ploughshare struck against something which he fancied was afirestone, and then he saw glittering in the earth a splinter ofshining metal which the plough had cut from something which gleamedbrightly in the furrow. He searched, and found a large golden armletof superior workmanship, and it was evident that the plough haddisturbed a Hun's grave. He searched further, and found morevaluable treasures, which Ib showed to the clergyman, who explainedtheir value to him. Then he went to the magistrate, who informed thepresident of the museum of the discovery, and advised Ib to take thetreasures himself to the president.

"You have found in the earth the best thing you could find,"said the magistrate.

"The best thing," thought Ib; "the very best thing for me,- andfound in the earth! Well, if it really is so, then the gypsy woman wasright in her prophecy."

So Ib went in the ferry-boat from Aarhus to Copenhagen. To him whohad only sailed once or twice on the river near his own home, thisseemed like a voyage on the ocean; and at length he arrived atCopenhagen. The value of the gold he had found was paid to him; it wasa large sum- six hundred dollars. Then Ib of the heath went out, andwandered about in the great city.

On the evening before the day he had settled to return with thecaptain of the passage-boat, Ib lost himself in the streets, andtook quite a different turning to the one he wished to follow. Hewandered on till he found himself in a poor street of the suburbcalled Christian's Haven. Not a creature could be seen. At last a verylittle girl came out of one of the wretched-looking houses, and Ibasked her to tell him the way to the street he wanted; she looked uptimidly at him, and began to cry bitterly. He asked her what was thematter; but what she said he could not understand. So he went alongthe street with her; and as they passed under a lamp, the light fellon the little girl's face. A strange sensation came over Ib, as hecaught sight of it. The living, breathing embodiment of LittleChristina stood before him, just as he remembered her in the days ofher childhood. He followed the child to the wretched house, andascended the narrow, crazy staircase which led to a little garret inthe roof. The air in the room was heavy and stifling, no light wasburning, and from one corner came sounds of moaning and sighing. Itwas the mother of the child who lay there on a miserable bed. With thehelp of a match, Ib struck a light, and approached her.

"Can I be of any service to you?" he asked. "This little girlbrought me up here; but I am a stranger in this city. Are there noneighbors or any one whom I can call?"

Then he raised the head of the sick woman, and smoothed herpillow. He started as he did so. It was Christina of the heath! No onehad mentioned her name to Ib for years; it would have disturbed hispeace of mind, especially as the reports respecting her were not good.The wealth which her husband had inherited from his parents had madehim proud and arrogant. He had given up his certain appointment, andtravelled for six months in foreign lands, and, on his return, hadlived in great style, and got into terrible debt. For a time he hadtrembled on the high pedestal on which he had placed himself, tillat last he toppled over, and ruin came. His numerous merry companions,and the visitors at his table, said it served him right, for he hadkept house like a madman. One morning his corpse was found in thecanal. The cold hand of death had already touched the heart ofChristina. Her youngest child, looked for in the midst ofprosperity, had sunk into the grave when only a few weeks old; andat last Christina herself became sick unto death, and lay, forsakenand dying, in a miserable room, amid poverty she might have borne inher younger days, but which was now more painful to her from theluxuries to which she had lately been accustomed. It was her eldestchild, also a Little Christina, whom Ib had followed to her home,where she suffered hunger and poverty with her mother.

It makes me unhappy to think that I shall die, and leave this poorchild," sighed she. "Oh, what will become of her?" She could say nomore.

Then Ib brought out another match, and lighted a piece of candlewhich he found in the room, and it threw a glimmering light over thewretched dwelling. Ib looked at the little girl, and thought ofChristina in her young days. For her sake, could he not love thischild, who was a stranger to him? As he thus reflected, the dyingwoman opened her eyes, and gazed at him. Did she recognize him? Henever knew; for not another word escaped her lips.

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

In the forest by the river Gudenau, not far from the heath, andbeneath the ridge of land, stood the little farm, newly painted andwhitewashed. The air was heavy and dark; there were no blossoms on theheath; the autumn winds whirled the yellow leaves towards theboatman's hut, in which strangers dwelt; but the little farm stoodsafely sheltered beneath the tall trees and the high ridge. The turfblazed brightly on the hearth, and within was sunlight, thesparkling light from the sunny eyes of a child; the birdlike tonesfrom the rosy lips ringing like the song of a lark in spring. Allwas life and joy. Little Christina sat on Ib's knee. Ib was to herboth father and mother; her own parents had vanished from hermemory, as a dream-picture vanishes alike from childhood and age. Ib'shouse was well and prettily furnished; for he was a prosperous mannow, while the mother of the little girl rested in the churchyard atCopenhagen, where she had died in poverty. Ib had money now- moneywhich had come to him out of the black earth; and he had Christina forhis own, after all.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

  IN A THOUSAND YEARS

   by Hans Christian Andersen

YES, in a thousand years people will fly on the wings of steamthrough the air, over the ocean! The young inhabitants of America willbecome visitors of old Europe. They will come over to see themonuments and the great cities, which will then be in ruins, just aswe in our time make pilgrimages to the tottering splendors of SouthernAsia. In a thousand years they will come!

The Thames, the Danube, and the Rhine still roll their course,Mont Blanc stands firm with its snow-capped summit, and the NorthernLights gleam over the land of the North; but generation aftergeneration has become dust, whole rows of the mighty of the moment areforgotten, like those who already slumber under the hill on whichthe rich trader, whose ground it is, has built a bench, on which hecan sit and look out across his waving corn fields.

"To Europe!" cry the young sons of America; "to the land of ourancestors, the glorious land of monuments and fancy- to Europe!"

The ship of the air comes. It is crowded with passengers, forthe transit is quicker than by sea. The electro-magnetic wire underthe ocean has already telegraphed the number of the aerial caravan.Europe is in sight. It is the coast of Ireland that they see, butthe passengers are still asleep; they will not be called till they areexactly over England. There they will first step on European shore, inthe land of Shakespeare, as the educated call it; in the land ofpolitics, the land of machines, as it is called by others.

Here they stay a whole day. That is all the time the busy race candevote to the whole of England and Scotland. Then the journey iscontinued through the tunnel under the English Channel, to France, theland of Charlemagne and Napoleon. Moliere is named, the learned mentalk of the classic school of remote antiquity. There is rejoicing andshouting for the names of heroes, poets, and men of science, whomour time does not know, but who will be born after our time inParis, the centre of Europe, and elsewhere.

The air steamboat flies over the country whence Columbus wentforth, where Cortez was born, and where Calderon sang dramas insounding verse. Beautiful black-eyed women live still in theblooming valleys, and the oldest songs speak of the Cid and theAlhambra.

Then through the air, over the sea, to Italy, where once layold, everlasting Rome. It has vanished! The Campagna lies desert. Asingle ruined wall is shown as the remains of St. Peter's, but thereis a doubt if this ruin be genuine.

Next to Greece, to sleep a night in the grand hotel at the topof Mount Olympus, to say that they have been there; and the journey iscontinued to the Bosphorus, to rest there a few hours, and see theplace where Byzantium lay; and where the legend tells that the haremstood in the time of the Turks, poor fishermen are now spreading theirnets.

Over the remains of mighty cities on the broad Danube, citieswhich we in our time know not, the travellers pass; but here andthere, on the rich sites of those that time shall bring forth, thecaravan sometimes descends, and departs thence again.

Down below lies Germany, that was once covered with a close net ofrailway and canals, the region where Luther spoke, where Goethesang, and Mozart once held the sceptre of harmony. Great names shinethere, in science and in art, names that are unknown to us. One daydevoted to seeing Germany, and one for the North, the country ofOersted and Linnaeus, and for Norway, the land of the old heroes andthe young Normans. Iceland is visited on the journey home. The geysersburn no more, Hecla is an extinct volcano, but the rocky island isstill fixed in the midst of the foaming sea, a continual monument oflegend and poetry.

"There is really a great deal to be seen in Europe," says theyoung American, "and we have seen it in a week, according to thedirections of the great traveller" (and here he mentions the name ofone of his contemporaries) "in his celebrated work, 'How to See AllEurope in a Week.'"

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 IN THE NURSERY

   by Hans Christian Andersen

FATHER, and mother, and brothers, and sisters, were gone to theplay; only little Anna and her grandpapa were left at home.

"We'll have a play too," he said, "and it may begin immediately."

"But we have no theatre," cried little Anna, "and we have no oneto act for us; my old doll cannot, for she is a fright, and my new onecannot, for she must not rumple her new clothes."

"One can always get actors if one makes use of what one has,"observed grandpapa.

"Now we'll go into the theatre. Here we will put up a book,there another, and there a third, in a sloping row. Now three on theother side; so, now we have the side scenes. The old box that liesyonder may be the back stairs; and we'll lay the flooring on top ofit. The stage represents a room, as every one may see. Now we want theactors. Let us see what we can find in the plaything-box. First thepersonages, and then we will get the play ready. One after theother; that will be capital! Here's a pipe-head, and yonder an oddglove; they will do very well for father and daughter."

"But those are only two characters," said little Anna. "Here'smy brother's old waistcoat- could not that play in our piece, too?"

"It's big enough, certainly," replied grandpapa. "It shall bethe lover. There's nothing in the pockets, and that's veryinteresting, for that's half of an unfortunate attachment. And here wehave the nut-cracker's boots, with spurs to them. Row, dow, dow! howthey can stamp and strut! They shall represent the unwelcome wooer,whom the lady does not like. What kind of a play will you have now?Shall it be a tragedy, or a domestic drama?"

"A domestic drama, please," said little Anna, "for the othersare so fond of that. Do you know one?"

"I know a hundred," said grandpapa. "Those that are most infavor are from the French, but they are not good for little girls.In the meantime, we may take one of the prettiest, for insidethey're all very much alike. Now I shake the pen! Cock-a-lorum! Sonow, here's the play, brin-bran-span new! Now listen to theplay-bill."

And grandpapa took a newspaper, and read as if he were readingfrom it:

 THE PIPE-HEAD AND THE GOOD HEAD

A Family Drama in One Act

   CHARACTERS

  MR. PIPE-HEAD, a father.

   MR. WAISTCOAT, a lover.

  MISS GLOVE, a daughter.

MR. DE BOOTS, a suitor.

"And now we're going to begin. The curtain rises. We have nocurtain, so it has risen already. All the characters are there, and sowe have them at hand. Now I speak as Papa Pipe-head! He's angryto-day. One can see that he's a colored meerschaum.

"'Snik, snak, snurre, bassellurre! I'm master of this house! I'mthe father of my daughter! Will you hear what I have to say? Mr. deBoots is a person in whom one may see one's face; his upper part is ofmorocco, and he has spurs into the bargain. Snikke, snakke, snak! Heshall have my daughter!"

"Now listen to what the Waistcoat says, little Anna," saidgrandpapa. "Now the Waistcoat's speaking. The Waistcoat has alaydown collar, and is very modest; but he knows his own value, andhas quite a right to say what he says:

"'I haven't a spot on me! Goodness of material ought to beappreciated. I am of real silk, and have strings to me.'

"'- On the wedding day, but no longer; you don't keep your colorin the wash.' This is Mr. Pipe-head who is speaking. 'Mr. de Bootsis water-tight, of strong leather, and yet very delicate; he cancreak, and clank with his spurs, and has an Italian physiognomy-'"

"But they ought to speak in verses," said Anna, "for I've heardthat's the most charming way of all."

"They can do that too," replied grandpapa; "and if the publicdemands it, they will talk in that way. Just look at little MissGlove, how she's pointing her fingers!

   "'Could I but have my love,

 Who then so happy as Glove!

  Ah!

 If I from him must part,

 I'm sure 'twill break my heart!'

  'Bah!'The last word was spoken by Mr. Pipe-head; and now it's Mr.Waistcoat's turn:

   "'O Glove, my own dear,

 Though it cost thee a tear,

Thou must be mine,

 For Holger Danske has sworn it!'

"Mr. de Boots, hearing this, kicks up, jingles his spurs, andknocks down three of the side-scenes."

"That's exceedingly charming!" cried little Anna.

"Silence! silence!" said grandpapa. "Silent approbation willshow that you are the educated public in the stalls. Now Miss Glovesings her great song with startling effects:

   "'I can't see, heigho!

 And therefore I'll crow!

   Kikkeriki, in the lofty hall!'

"Now comes the exciting part, little Anna. This is the mostimportant in all the play. Mr. Waistcoat undoes himself, and addresseshis speech to you, that you may applaud; but leave it alone,- that'sconsidered more genteel.

"'I am driven to extremities! Take care of yourself! Now comes theplot! You are the Pipe-head, and I am the good head- snap! there yougo!"

"Do you notice this, little Anna?" asked grandpapa. "That's a mostcharming comedy. Mr. Waistcoat seized the old Pipe-head and put him inhis pocket; there he lies, and the Waistcoat says:

"'You are in my pocket; you can't come out till you promise tounite me to your daughter Glove on the left. I hold out my righthand.'"

"That's awfully pretty," said little Anna.

"And now the old Pipe-head replies:

   "'Though I'm all ear,

 Very stupid I appear:

   Where's my humor? Gone, I fear,

   And I feel my hollow stick's not here,

 Ah! never, my dear,

 Did I feel so queer.

 Oh! pray let me out,

   And like a lamb led to slaughter

 I'll betroth you, no doubt,

  To my daughter.'"

"Is the play over already?" asked little Anna.

"By no means," replied grandpapa. "It's only all over with Mr.de Boots. Now the lovers kneel down, and one of them sings:

"'Father!'and the other,

  'Come, do as you ought to do,-

   Bless your son and daughter.'And they receive his blessing, and celebrate their wedding, and allthe pieces of furniture sing in chorus,

 "'Klink! clanks!

   A thousand thanks;

 And now the play is over!'

"And now we'll applaud," said grandpapa. "We'll call them all out,and the pieces of furniture too, for they are of mahogany."

"And is not our play just as good as those which the others havein the real theatre?"

"Our play is much better," said grandpapa. "It is shorter, theperformers are natural, and it has passed away the interval beforetea-time."

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   IN THE UTTERMOST PARTS OF THE SEA

   by Hans Christian Andersen

SOME years ago, large ships were sent towards the north pole, toexplore the distant coasts, and to try how far men could penetrateinto those unknown regions. For more than a year one of these shipshad been pushing its way northward, amid snow and ice, and the sailorshad endured many hardships; till at length winter set in, and thesun entirely disappeared; for many weeks there would be constantnight. All around, as far as the eye could reach, nothing could beseen but fields of ice, in which the ship remained stuck fast. Thesnow lay piled up in great heaps, and of these the sailors madehuts, in the form of bee-hives, some of them as large and spaciousas one of the "Huns' graves," and others only containing room enoughto hold three or four men. It was not quite dark; the northernlights shot forth red and blue flames, like continuous fireworks,and the snow glittered, and reflected back the light, so that thenight here was one long twilight. When the moon was brightest, thenatives came in crowds to see the sailors. They had a very singularappearance in their rough, hairy dresses of fur, and riding in sledgesover the ice. They brought with them furs and skins in greatabundance, so that the snow-houses were soon provided with warmcarpets, and the furs also served for the sailors to wrap themselvesin, when they slept under the roofs of snow, while outside it wasfreezing with a cold far more severe than in the winter with us. Inour country it was still autumn, though late in the season; and theythought of that in their distant exile, and often pictured tothemselves the yellow leaves on the trees at home. Their watchespointed to the hours of evening, and time to go to sleep, althoughin these regions it was now always night.

In one of the huts, two of the men laid themselves down to rest.The younger of these men had brought with him from home his best,his dearest treasure- a Bible, which his grandmother had given himon his departure. Every night the sacred volume rested under his head,and he had known from his childhood what was written in it. Everyday he read in the book, and while stretched on his cold couch, theholy words he had learnt would come into his mind: "If I take thewings of the morning, and fly to the uttermost parts of the sea,even there Thou art with me, and Thy right hand shall uphold me;"and under the influence of that faith which these holy words inspired,sleep came upon him, and dreams, which are the manifestations of Godto the spirit. The soul lives and acts, while the body is at rest.He felt this life in him, and it was as if he heard the sound of dear,well-known melodies, as if the breezes of summer floated around him;and over his couch shone a ray of brightness, as if it were shiningthrough the covering of his snow-roof. He lifted his head, and sawthat the bright gleaming was not the reflection of the glitteringsnow, but the dazzling brightness of the pinions of a mighty angel,into whose beaming face he was gazing. As from the cup of a lily,the angel rose from amidst the leaves of the Bible; and, stretchingout his arm, the walls of the hut sunk down, as though they had beenformed of a light, airy veil of mist, and the green hills andmeadows of home, with its ruddy woods, lay spread around him in thequiet sunshine of a lovely autumn day. The nest of the stork wasempty, but ripe fruit still hung on the wild apple-tree, althoughthe leaves had fallen. The red hips gleamed on the hedges, and thestarling which hung in the green cage outside the window of thepeasant's hut, which was his home, whistled the tune which he hadtaught him. His grandmother hung green birds'-food around the cage, ashe, her grandson, had been accustomed to do. The daughter of thevillage blacksmith, who was young and fair, stood at the well, drawingwater. She nodded to the grandmother, and the old woman nodded to her,and pointed to a letter which had come from a long way off. Thatvery morning the letter had arrived from the cold regions of thenorth; there, where the absent one was sweetly sleeping under theprotecting hand of God. They laughed and wept over the letter; and he,far away, amid ice and snow, under the shadow of the angel's wings,wept and smiled with them in spirit; for he saw and heard it all inhis dream. From the letter they read aloud the words of Holy Writ: "Inthe uttermost parts of the sea, Thy right hand shall uphold me." Andas the angel spread his wings like a veil over the sleeper, therewas the sound of beautiful music and a hymn. Then the vision fled.It was dark again in the snow-hut: but the Bible still restedbeneath his head, and faith and hope dwelt in his heart. God waswith him, and he carried home in his heart, even "in the uttermostparts of the sea.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

JACK THE DULLARD

 AN OLD STORY TOLD ANEW

   by Hans Christian Andersen

FAR in the interior of the country lay an old baronial hall, andin it lived an old proprietor, who had two sons, which two young menthought themselves too clever by half. They wanted to go out and woothe King's daughter; for the maiden in question had publicly announcedthat she would choose for her husband that youth who could arrange hiswords best.

So these two geniuses prepared themselves a full week for thewooing- this was the longest time that could be granted them; but itwas enough, for they had had much preparatory information, andeverybody knows how useful that is. One of them knew the whole Latindictionary by heart, and three whole years of the daily paper of thelittle town into the bargain, and so well, indeed, that he couldrepeat it all either backwards or forwards, just as he chose. Theother was deeply read in the corporation laws, and knew by heartwhat every corporation ought to know; and accordingly he thought hecould talk of affairs of state, and put his spoke in the wheel inthe council. And he knew one thing more: he could embroider suspenderswith roses and other flowers, and with arabesques, for he was a tasty,light-fingered fellow.

"I shall win the Princess!" So cried both of them. Therefore theirold papa gave to each of them a handsome horse. The youth who knew thedictionary and newspaper by heart had a black horse, and he who knewall about the corporation laws received a milk-white steed. Thenthey rubbed the corners of their mouths with fish-oil, so that theymight become very smooth and glib. All the servants stood below in thecourtyard, and looked on while they mounted their horses; and justby chance the third son came up. For the proprietor had really threesons, though nobody counted the third with his brothers, because hewas not so learned as they, and indeed he was generally known as "Jackthe Dullard."

"Hallo!" said Jack the Dullard, "where are you going? I declareyou have put on your Sunday clothes!"

"We're going to the King's court, as suitors to the King'sdaughter. Don't you know the announcement that has been made allthrough the country?" And they told him all about it.

"My word! I'll be in it too!" cried Jack the Dullard; and histwo brothers burst out laughing at him, and rode away.

"Father, dear," said Jack, "I must have a horse too. I do feelso desperately inclined to marry! If she accepts me, she accepts me;and if she won't have me, I'll have her; but she shall be mine!"

"Don't talk nonsense," replied the old gentleman. "You shallhave no horse from me. You don't know how to speak- you can'tarrange your words. Your brothers are very different fellows fromyou."

"Well," quoth Jack the Dullard, "If I can't have a horse, I'lltake the Billy-goat, who belongs to me, and he can carry me verywell!"

And so said, so done. He mounted the Billy-goat, pressed his heelsinto its sides, and galloped down the high street like a hurricane.

"Hei, houp! that was a ride! Here I come!" shouted Jack theDullard, and he sang till his voice echoed far and wide.

But his brothers rode slowly on in advance of him. They spokenot a word, for they were thinking about the fine extempore speechesthey would have to bring out, and these had to be cleverly preparedbeforehand.

"Hallo!" shouted Jack the Dullard. "Here am I! Look what I havefound on the high road." And he showed them what it was, and it wasa dead crow.

"Dullard!" exclaimed the brothers, "what are you going to dowith that?"

"With the crow? why, I am going to give it to the Princess."

"Yes, do so," said they; and they laughed, and rode on.

"Hallo, here I am again! just see what I have found now: you don'tfind that on the high road every day!"

And the brothers turned round to see what he could have found now.

"Dullard!" they cried, "that is only an old wooden shoe, and theupper part is missing into the bargain; are you going to give thatalso to the Princess?"

"Most certainly I shall," replied Jack the Dullard; and againthe brothers laughed and rode on, and thus they got far in advanceof him; but-

"Hallo- hop rara!" and there was Jack the Dullard again. "It isgetting better and better," he cried. "Hurrah! it is quite famous."

"Why, what have you found this time?" inquired the brothers.

"Oh," said Jack the Dullard, "I can hardly tell you. How gladthe Princess will be!"

"Bah!" said the brothers; "that is nothing but clay out of theditch."

"Yes, certainly it is," said Jack the Dullard; "and clay of thefinest sort. See, it is so wet, it runs through one's fingers." And hefilled his pocket with the clay.

But his brothers galloped on till the sparks flew, andconsequently they arrived a full hour earlier at the town gate thancould Jack. Now at the gate each suitor was provided with a number,and all were placed in rows immediately on their arrival, six ineach row, and so closely packed together that they could not movetheir arms; and that was a prudent arrangement, for they wouldcertainly have come to blows, had they been able, merely because oneof them stood before the other.

All the inhabitants of the country round about stood in greatcrowds around the castle, almost under the very windows, to see thePrincess receive the suitors; and as each stepped into the hall, hispower of speech seemed to desert him, like the light of a candlethat is blown out. Then the Princess would say, "He is of no use! Awaywith him out of the hall!"

At last the turn came for that brother who knew the dictionaryby heart; but he did not know it now; he had absolutely forgotten italtogether; and the boards seemed to re-echo with his footsteps, andthe ceiling of the hall was made of looking-glass, so that he sawhimself standing on his head; and at the window stood three clerks anda head clerk, and every one of them was writing down every single wordthat was uttered, so that it might be printed in the newspapers, andsold for a penny at the street corners. It was a terrible ordeal,and they had, moreover, made such a fire in the stove, that the roomseemed quite red hot.

"It is dreadfully hot here!" observed the first brother.

"Yes," replied the Princess, "my father is going to roast youngpullets today."

"Baa!" there he stood like a baa-lamb. He had not been preparedfor a speech of this kind, and had not a word to say, though heintended to say something witty. "Baa!"

"He is of no use!" said the Princess. "Away with him!"

And he was obliged to go accordingly. And now the second brothercame in.

"It is terribly warm here!" he observed.

"Yes, we're roasting pullets to-day," replied the Princess.

"What- what were you- were you pleased to ob-" stammered he- andall the clerks wrote down, "pleased to ob-"

"He is of no use!" said the Princess. "Away with him!"

Now came the turn of Jack the Dullard. He rode into the hall onhis goat.

"Well, it's most abominably hot here."

"Yes, because I'm roasting young pullets," replied the Princess.

"Ah, that's lucky!" exclaimed Jack the Dullard, "for I supposeyou'll let me roast my crow at the same time?"

"With the greatest pleasure," said the Princess. "But have youanything you can roast it in? for I have neither pot nor pan."

"Certainly I have!" said Jack. "Here's a cooking utensil with atin handle."

And he brought out the old wooden shoe, and put the crow into it.

"Well, that is a famous dish!" said the Princess. "But whatshall we do for sauce?"

"Oh, I have that in my pocket," said Jack; "I have so much of itthat I can afford to throw some away;" and he poured some of theclay out of his pocket.

"I like that!" said the Princess. "You can give an answer, and youhave something to say for yourself, and so you shall be my husband.But are you aware that every word we speak is being taken down, andwill be published in the paper to-morrow? Look yonder, and you willsee in every window three clerks and a head clerk; and the old headclerk is the worst of all, for he can't understand anything."

But she only said this to frighten Jack the Dullard; and theclerks gave a great crow of delight, and each one spurted a blot outof his pen on to the floor.

"Oh, those are the gentlemen, are they?" said Jack; "then I willgive the best I have to the head clerk." And he turned out hispockets, and flung the wet clay full in the head clerk's face.

"That was very cleverly done," observed the Princess. "I could nothave done that; but I shall learn in time."

And accordingly Jack the Dullard was made a king, and received acrown and a wife, and sat upon a throne. And this report we have wetfrom the press of the head clerk and the corporation of printers-but they are not to be depended upon in the least.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   LITTLE CLAUS AND BIG CLAUS

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IN a village there once lived two men who had the same name.They were both called Claus. One of them had four horses, but theother had only one; so to distinguish them, people called the owner ofthe four horses, "Great Claus," and he who had only one, "LittleClaus." Now we shall hear what happened to them, for this is a truestory.

Through the whole week, Little Claus was obliged to plough forGreat Claus, and lend him his one horse; and once a week, on a Sunday,Great Claus lent him all his four horses. Then how Little Clauswould smack his whip over all five horses, they were as good as hisown on that one day. The sun shone brightly, and the church bells wereringing merrily as the people passed by, dressed in their bestclothes, with their prayer-books under their arms. They were goingto hear the clergyman preach. They looked at Little Claus ploughingwith his five horses, and he was so proud that he smacked his whip,and said, "Gee-up, my five horses."

"You must not say that," said Big Claus; "for only one of thembelongs to you." But Little Claus soon forgot what he ought to say,and when any one passed he would call out, "Gee-up, my five horses!"

"Now I must beg you not to say that again," said Big Claus; "forif you do, I shall hit your horse on the head, so that he will dropdead on the spot, and there will be an end of him."

"I promise you I will not say it any more," said the other; but assoon as people came by, nodding to him, and wishing him "Good day," hebecame so pleased, and thought how grand it looked to have five horsesploughing in his field, that he cried out again, "Gee-up, all myhorses!"

"I'll gee-up your horses for you," said Big Claus; and seizing ahammer, he struck the one horse of Little Claus on the head, and hefell dead instantly.

"Oh, now I have no horse at all, said Little Claus, weeping. Butafter a while he took off the dead horse's skin, and hung the hideto dry in the wind. Then he put the dry skin into a bag, and,placing it over his shoulder, went out into the next town to sellthe horse's skin. He had a very long way to go, and had to passthrough a dark, gloomy forest. Presently a storm arose, and he losthis way, and before he discovered the right path, evening came on, andit was still a long way to the town, and too far to return home beforenight. Near the road stood a large farmhouse. The shutters outside thewindows were closed, but lights shone through the crevices at the top."I might get permission to stay here for the night," thought LittleClaus; so he went up to the door and knocked. The farmer's wife openedthe door; but when she heard what he wanted, she told him to goaway, as her husband would not allow her to admit strangers. "Then Ishall be obliged to lie out here," said Little Claus to himself, asthe farmer's wife shut the door in his face. Near to the farmhousestood a large haystack, and between it and the house was a small shed,with a thatched roof. "I can lie up there," said Little Claus, as hesaw the roof; "it will make a famous bed, but I hope the stork willnot fly down and bite my legs;" for on it stood a living stork,whose nest was in the roof. So Little Claus climbed to the roof of theshed, and while he turned himself to get comfortable, he discoveredthat the wooden shutters, which were closed, did not reach to the topsof the windows of the farmhouse, so that he could see into a room,in which a large table was laid out with wine, roast meat, and asplendid fish. The farmer's wife and the sexton were sitting at thetable together; and she filled his glass, and helped him plenteouslyto fish, which appeared to be his favorite dish. "If I could onlyget some, too," thought Little Claus; and then, as he stretched hisneck towards the window he spied a large, beautiful pie,- indeedthey had a glorious feast before them.

At this moment he heard some one riding down the road, towards thefarmhouse. It was the farmer returning home. He was a good man, butstill he had a very strange prejudice,- he could not bear the sight ofa sexton. If one appeared before him, he would put himself in aterrible rage. In consequence of this dislike, the sexton had goneto visit the farmer's wife during her husband's absence from home, andthe good woman had placed before him the best she had in the houseto eat. When she heard the farmer coming she was frightened, andbegged the sexton to hide himself in a large empty chest that stood inthe room. He did so, for he knew her husband could not endure thesight of a sexton. The woman then quickly put away the wine, and hidall the rest of the nice things in the oven; for if her husband hadseen them he would have asked what they were brought out for.

"Oh, dear," sighed Little Claus from the top of the shed, as hesaw all the good things disappear.

"Is any one up there?" asked the farmer, looking up anddiscovering Little Claus. "Why are you lying up there? Come down,and come into the house with me." So Little Claus came down and toldthe farmer how he had lost his way and begged for a night's lodging.

"All right," said the farmer; "but we must have something to eatfirst."

The woman received them both very kindly, laid the cloth on alarge table, and placed before them a dish of porridge. The farmer wasvery hungry, and ate his porridge with a good appetite, but LittleClaus could not help thinking of the nice roast meat, fish and pies,which he knew were in the oven. Under the table, at his feet, laythe sack containing the horse's skin, which he intended to sell at thenext town. Now Little Claus did not relish the porridge at all, sohe trod with his foot on the sack under the table, and the dry skinsqueaked quite loud. "Hush!" said Little Claus to his sack, at thesame time treading upon it again, till it squeaked louder than before.

"Hallo! what have you got in your sack!" asked the farmer.

"Oh, it is a conjuror," said Little Claus; "and he says we neednot eat porridge, for he has conjured the oven full of roast meat,fish, and pie."

"Wonderful!" cried the farmer, starting up and opening the ovendoor; and there lay all the nice things hidden by the farmer's wife,but which he supposed had been conjured there by the wizard underthe table. The woman dared not say anything; so she placed thethings before them, and they both ate of the fish, the meat, and thepastry.

Then Little Claus trod again upon his sack, and it squeaked asbefore. "What does he say now?" asked the farmer.

"He says," replied Little Claus, "that there are three bottlesof wine for us, standing in the corner, by the oven."

So the woman was obliged to bring out the wine also, which she hadhidden, and the farmer drank it till he became quite merry. He wouldhave liked such a conjuror as Little Claus carried in his sack. "Couldhe conjure up the evil one?" asked the farmer. "I should like to seehim now, while I am so merry."

"Oh, yes!" replied Little Claus, "my conjuror can do anything Iask him,- can you not?" he asked, treading at the same time on thesack till it squeaked. "Do you hear? he answers 'Yes,' but he fearsthat we shall not like to look at him."

"Oh, I am not afraid. What will he be like?"

"Well, he is very much like a sexton."

"Ha!" said the farmer, "then he must be ugly. Do you know I cannotendure the sight of a sexton. However, that doesn't matter, I shallknow who it is; so I shall not mind. Now then, I have got up mycourage, but don't let him come too near me."

"Stop, I must ask the conjuror," said Little Claus; so he trodon the bag, and stooped his ear down to listen.

"What does he say?"

"He says that you must go and open that large chest which standsin the corner, and you will see the evil one crouching down inside;but you must hold the lid firmly, that he may not slip out."

"Will you come and help me hold it?" said the farmer, goingtowards the chest in which his wife had hidden the sexton, who now layinside, very much frightened. The farmer opened the lid a verylittle way, and peeped in.

"Oh," cried he, springing backwards, "I saw him, and he is exactlylike our sexton. How dreadful it is!" So after that he was obligedto drink again, and they sat and drank till far into the night.

"You must sell your conjuror to me," said the farmer; "ask as muchas you like, I will pay it; indeed I would give you directly a wholebushel of gold."

"No, indeed, I cannot," said Little Claus; "only think how muchprofit I could make out of this conjuror."

"But I should like to have him," said the fanner, still continuinghis entreaties.

"Well," said Little Claus at length, "you have been so good asto give me a night's lodging, I will not refuse you; you shall havethe conjuror for a bushel of money, but I will have quite fullmeasure."

"So you shall," said the farmer; "but you must take away the chestas well. I would not have it in the house another hour; there is noknowing if he may not be still there."

So Little Claus gave the farmer the sack containing the driedhorse's skin, and received in exchange a bushel of money- fullmeasure. The farmer also gave him a wheelbarrow on which to carry awaythe chest and the gold.

"Farewell," said Little Claus, as he went off with his money andthe great chest, in which the sexton lay still concealed. On oneside of the forest was a broad, deep river, the water flowed sorapidly that very few were able to swim against the stream. A newbridge had lately been built across it, and in the middle of thisbridge Little Claus stopped, and said, loud enough to be heard bythe sexton, "Now what shall I do with this stupid chest; it is asheavy as if it were full of stones: I shall be tired if I roll itany farther, so I may as well throw it in the river; if it swims afterme to my house, well and good, and if not, it will not much matter."

So he seized the chest in his hand and lifted it up a little, asif he were going to throw it into the water.

"No, leave it alone," cried the sexton from within the chest; "letme out first."

"Oh," exclaimed Little Claus, pretending to be frightened, "heis in there still, is he? I must throw him into the river, that he maybe drowned."

"Oh, no; oh, no," cried the sexton; "I will give you a wholebushel full of money if you will let me go.

"Why, that is another matter," said Little Claus, opening thechest. The sexton crept out, pushed the empty chest into the water,and went to his house, then he measured out a whole bushel full ofgold for Little Claus, who had already received one from the farmer,so that now he had a barrow full.

"I have been well paid for my horse," said he to himself when hereached home, entered his own room, and emptied all his money into aheap on the floor. "How vexed Great Claus will be when he finds outhow rich I have become all through my one horse; but I shall nottell him exactly how it all happened." Then he sent a boy to GreatClaus to borrow a bushel measure.

"What can he want it for?" thought Great Claus; so he smearedthe bottom of the measure with tar, that some of whatever was put intoit might stick there and remain. And so it happened; for when themeasure returned, three new silver florins were sticking to it.

"What does this mean?" said Great Claus; so he ran off directly toLittle Claus, and asked, "Where did you get so much money?"

"Oh, for my horse's skin, I sold it yesterday."

"It was certainly well paid for then," said Great Claus; and heran home to his house, seized a hatchet, and knocked all his fourhorses on the head, flayed off their skins, and took them to thetown to sell. "Skins, skins, who'll buy skins?" he cried, as he wentthrough the streets. All the shoemakers and tanners came running,and asked how much he wanted for them.

"A bushel of money, for each," replied Great Claus.

"Are you mad?" they all cried; "do you think we have money tospend by the bushel?"

"Skins, skins," he cried again, "who'll buy skins?" but to all whoinquired the price, his answer was, "a bushel of money."

"He is making fools of us," said they all; then the shoemakerstook their straps, and the tanners their leather aprons, and beganto beat Great Claus.

"Skins, skins!" they cried, mocking him; "yes, we'll mark yourskin for you, till it is black and blue."

"Out of the town with him," said they. And Great Claus was obligedto run as fast as he could, he had never before been so thoroughlybeaten.

"Ah," said he, as he came to his house; "Little Claus shall pay mefor this; I will beat him to death."

Meanwhile the old grandmother of Little Claus died. She had beencross, unkind, and really spiteful to him; but he was very sorry,and took the dead woman and laid her in his warm bed to see if hecould bring her to life again. There he determined that she should liethe whole night, while he seated himself in a chair in a corner of theroom as he had often done before. During the night, as he sat there,the door opened, and in came Great Claus with a hatchet. He knewwell where Little Claus's bed stood; so he went right up to it, andstruck the old grandmother on the head. thinking it must be LittleClaus.

"There," cried he, "now you cannot make a fool of me again;" andthen he went home.

"That is a very wicked man," thought Little Claus; "he meant tokill me. It is a good thing for my old grandmother that she wasalready dead, or he would have taken her life." Then he dressed hisold grandmother in her best clothes, borrowed a horse of his neighbor,and harnessed it to a cart. Then he placed the old woman on the backseat, so that she might not fall out as he drove, and rode awaythrough the wood. By sunrise they reached a large inn, where LittleClaus stopped and went to get something to eat. The landlord was arich man, and a good man too; but as passionate as if he had been madeof pepper and snuff.

"Good morning," said he to Little Claus; "you are come betimesto-day."

"Yes," said Little Claus; "I am going to the town with my oldgrandmother; she is sitting at the back of the wagon, but I cannotbring her into the room. Will you take her a glass of mead? but youmust speak very loud, for she cannot hear well."

"Yes, certainly I will," replied the landlord; and, pouring outa glass of mead, he carried it out to the dead grandmother, who satupright in the cart. "Here is a glass of mead from your grandson,"said the landlord. The dead woman did not answer a word, but sat quitestill. "Do you not hear?" cried the landlord as loud as he could;"here is a glass of mead from your grandson."

Again and again he bawled it out, but as she did not stir heflew into a passion, and threw the glass of mead in her face; itstruck her on the nose, and she fell backwards out of the cart, forshe was only seated there, not tied in.

Hallo!" cried Little Claus, rushing out of the door, and seizinghold of the landlord by the throat; "you have killed my grandmother;see, here is a great hole in her forehead."

"Oh, how unfortunate," said the landlord, wringing his hands."This all comes of my fiery temper. Dear Little Claus, I will give youa bushel of money; I will bury your grandmother as if she were my own;only keep silent, or else they will cut off my head, and that would bedisagreeable."

So it happened that Little Claus received another bushel of money,and the landlord buried his old grandmother as if she had been hisown. When Little Claus reached home again, he immediately sent a boyto Great Claus, requesting him to lend him a bushel measure. "How isthis?" thought Great Claus; "did I not kill him? I must go and see formyself." So he went to Little Claus, and took the bushel measurewith him. "How did you get all this money?" asked Great Claus, staringwith wide open eyes at his neighbor's treasures.

"You killed my grandmother instead of me," said Little Claus;"so I have sold her for a bushel of money."

"That is a good price at all events," said Great Claus. So he wenthome, took a hatchet, and killed his old grandmother with one blow.Then he placed her on a cart, and drove into the town to theapothecary, and asked him if he would buy a dead body.

"Whose is it, and where did you get it?" asked the apothecary.

"It is my grandmother," he replied; "I killed her with a blow,that I might get a bushel of money for her."

"Heaven preserve us!" cried the apothecary, "you are out of yourmind. Don't say such things, or you will lose your head." And thenhe talked to him seriously about the wicked deed he had done, and toldhim that such a wicked man would surely be punished. Great Claus gotso frightened that he rushed out of the surgery, jumped into the cart,whipped up his horses, and drove home quickly. The apothecary andall the people thought him mad, and let him drive where he liked.

"You shall pay for this," said Great Claus, as soon as he got intothe highroad, "that you shall, Little Claus." So as soon as he reachedhome he took the largest sack he could find and went over to LittleClaus. "You have played me another trick," said he. "First, I killedall my horses, and then my old grandmother, and it is all yourfault; but you shall not make a fool of me any more." So he laidhold of Little Claus round the body, and pushed him into the sack,which he took on his shoulders, saying, "Now I'm going to drown you inthe river.

He had a long way to go before he reached the river, and LittleClaus was not a very light weight to carry. The road led by thechurch, and as they passed he could hear the organ playing and thepeople singing beautifully. Great Claus put down the sack close to thechurch-door, and thought he might as well go in and hear a psalmbefore he went any farther. Little Claus could not possibly get out ofthe sack, and all the people were in church; so in he went.

"Oh dear, oh dear," sighed Little Claus in the sack, as heturned and twisted about; but he found he could not loosen thestring with which it was tied. Presently an old cattle driver, withsnowy hair, passed by, carrying a large staff in his hand, withwhich he drove a large herd of cows and oxen before him. They stumbledagainst the sack in which lay Little Claus, and turned it over. "Ohdear," sighed Little Claus, "I am very young, yet I am soon going toheaven."

"And I, poor fellow," said the drover, "I who am so old already,cannot get there."

"Open the sack," cried Little Claus; "creep into it instead of me,and you will soon be there."

"With all my heart," replied the drover, opening the sack, fromwhich sprung Little Claus as quickly as possible. "Will you takecare of my cattle?" said the old man, as he crept into the bag.

"Yes," said Little Claus, and he tied up the sack, and then walkedoff with all the cows and oxen.

When Great Claus came out of church, he took up the sack, andplaced it on his shoulders. It appeared to have become lighter, forthe old drover was not half so heavy as Little Claus.

"How light he seems now," said he. "Ah, it is because I havebeen to a church." So he walked on to the river, which was deep andbroad, and threw the sack containing the old drover into the water,believing it to be Little Claus. "There you may lie!" he exclaimed;"you will play me no more tricks now." Then he turned to go home,but when he came to a place where two roads crossed, there wasLittle Claus driving the cattle. "How is this?" said Great Claus. "DidI not drown you just now?"

"Yes," said Little Claus; "you threw me into the river abouthalf an hour ago."

"But wherever did you get all these fine beasts?" asked GreatClaus.

"These beasts are sea-cattle," replied Little Claus. "I'll tellyou the whole story, and thank you for drowning me; I am above younow, I am really very rich. I was frightened, to be sure, while Ilay tied up in the sack, and the wind whistled in my ears when youthrew me into the river from the bridge, and I sank to the bottomimmediately; but I did not hurt myself, for I fell upon beautifullysoft grass which grows down there; and in a moment, the sack opened,and the sweetest little maiden came towards me. She had snow-whiterobes, and a wreath of green leaves on her wet hair. She took me bythe hand, and said, 'So you are come, Little Claus, and here aresome cattle for you to begin with. About a mile farther on the road,there is another herd for you.' Then I saw that the river formed agreat highway for the people who live in the sea. They were walkingand driving here and there from the sea to the land at the, spot wherethe river terminates. The bed of the river was covered with theloveliest flowers and sweet fresh grass. The fish swam past me asrapidly as the birds do here in the air. How handsome all the peoplewere, and what fine cattle were grazing on the hills and in thevalleys!"

"But why did you come up again," said Great Claus, "if it wasall so beautiful down there? I should not have done so?"

"Well," said Little Claus, "it was good policy on my part; youheard me say just now that I was told by the sea-maiden to go a milefarther on the road, and I should find a whole herd of cattle. Bythe road she meant the river, for she could not travel any otherway; but I knew the winding of the river, and how it bends,sometimes to the right and sometimes to the left, and it seemed a longway, so I chose a shorter one; and, by coming up to the land, and thendriving across the fields back again to the river, I shall save half amile, and get all my cattle more quickly."

"What a lucky fellow you are!" exclaimed Great Claus. "Do youthink I should get any sea-cattle if I went down to the bottom ofthe river?"

"Yes, I think so," said Little Claus; "but I cannot carry youthere in a sack, you are too heavy. However if you will go therefirst, and then creep into a sack, I will throw you in with thegreatest pleasure."

"Thank you," said Great Claus; "but remember, if I do not getany sea-cattle down there I shall come up again and give you a goodthrashing."

"No, now, don't be too fierce about it!" said Little Claus, asthey walked on towards the river. When they approached it, the cattle,who were very thirsty, saw the stream, and ran down to drink.

"See what a hurry they are in," said Little Claus, "they arelonging to get down again,"

"Come, help me, make haste," said Great Claus; "or you'll getbeaten." So he crept into a large sack, which had been lying acrossthe back of one of the oxen.

"Put in a stone," said Great Claus, "or I may not sink."

"Oh, there's not much fear of that," he replied; still he put alarge stone into the bag, and then tied it tightly, and gave it apush.

"Plump!" In went Great Claus, and immediately sank to the bottomof the river.

"I'm afraid he will not find any cattle," said Little Claus, andthen he drove his own beasts homewards.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

  LITTLE IDA'S FLOWERS

   by Hans Christian Andersen

"My poor flowers are quite dead," said little Ida, "they were sopretty yesterday evening, and now all the leaves are hanging downquite withered. What do they do that for," she asked, of the studentwho sat on the sofa; she liked him very much, he could tell the mostamusing stories, and cut out the prettiest pictures; hearts, andladies dancing, castles with doors that opened, as well as flowers; hewas a delightful student. "Why do the flowers look so faded to-day?"she asked again, and pointed to her nosegay, which was quite withered.

"Don't you know what is the matter with them?" said the student."The flowers were at a ball last night, and therefore, it is no wonderthey hang their heads."

"But flowers cannot dance?" cried little Ida.

"Yes indeed, they can," replied the student. "When it growsdark, and everybody is asleep, they jump about quite merrily. Theyhave a ball almost every night."

"Can children go to these balls?"

"Yes," said the student, "little daisies and lilies of thevalley."

"Where do the beautiful flowers dance?" asked little Ida.

"Have you not often seen the large castle outside the gates of thetown, where the king lives in summer, and where the beautiful gardenis full of flowers? And have you not fed the swans with bread whenthey swam towards you? Well, the flowers have capital balls there,believe me."

"I was in the garden out there yesterday with my mother," saidIda, "but all the leaves were off the trees, and there was not asingle flower left. Where are they? I used to see so many in thesummer."

"They are in the castle," replied the student. "You must know thatas soon as the king and all the court are gone into the town, theflowers run out of the garden into the castle, and you should seehow merry they are. The two most beautiful roses seat themselves onthe throne, and are called the king and queen, then all the redcockscombs range themselves on each side, and bow, these are thelords-in-waiting. After that the pretty flowers come in, and thereis a grand ball. The blue violets represent little naval cadets, anddance with hyacinths and crocuses which they call young ladies. Thetulips and tiger-lilies are the old ladies who sit and watch thedancing, so that everything may be conducted with order andpropriety."

"But," said little Ida, "is there no one there to hurt the flowersfor dancing in the king's castle?"

"No one knows anything about it," said the student. "The oldsteward of the castle, who has to watch there at night, sometimescomes in; but he carries a great bunch of keys, and as soon as theflowers hear the keys rattle, they run and hide themselves behindthe long curtains, and stand quite still, just peeping their headsout. Then the old steward says, 'I smell flowers here,' but hecannot see them."

"Oh how capital," said little Ida, clapping her hands. "Should Ibe able to see these flowers?"

"Yes," said the student, "mind you think of it the next time yougo out, no doubt you will see them, if you peep through the window.I did so to-day, and I saw a long yellow lily lying stretched out onthe sofa. She was a court lady."

"Can the flowers from the Botanical Gardens go to these balls?"asked Ida. "It is such a distance!"

"Oh yes," said the student 'whenever they like, for they canfly. Have you not seen those beautiful red, white. and yellowbutterflies, that look like flowers? They were flowers once. They haveflown off their stalks into the air, and flap their leaves as ifthey were little wings to make them fly. Then, if they behave well,they obtain permission to fly about during the day, instead of beingobliged to sit still on their stems at home, and so in time theirleaves become real wings. It may be, however, that the flowers inthe Botanical Gardens have never been to the king's palace, and,therefore, they know nothing of the merry doings at night, whichtake place there. I will tell you what to do, and the botanicalprofessor, who lives close by here, will be so surprised. You know himvery well, do you not? Well, next time you go into his garden, youmust tell one of the flowers that there is going to be a grand ball atthe castle, then that flower will tell all the others, and they willfly away to the castle as soon as possible. And when the professorwalks into his garden, there will not be a single flower left. Howhe will wonder what has become of them!"

"But how can one flower tell another? Flowers cannot speak?"

"No, certainly not," replied the student; "but they can makesigns. Have you not often seen that when the wind blows they nod atone another, and rustle all their green leaves?"

"Can the professor understand the signs?" asked Ida.

"Yes, to be sure he can. He went one morning into his garden,and saw a stinging nettle making signs with its leaves to abeautiful red carnation. It was saying, 'You are so pretty, I like youvery much.' But the professor did not approve of such nonsense, sohe clapped his hands on the nettle to stop it. Then the leaves,which are its fingers, stung him so sharply that he has never venturedto touch a nettle since."

"Oh how funny!" said Ida, and she laughed.

"How can anyone put such notions into a child's head?" said atiresome lawyer, who had come to pay a visit, and sat on the sofa.He did not like the student, and would grumble when he saw him cuttingout droll or amusing pictures. Sometimes it would be a man hangingon a gibbet and holding a heart in his hand as if he had been stealinghearts. Sometimes it was an old witch riding through the air on abroom and carrying her husband on her nose. But the lawyer did notlike such jokes, and he would say as he had just said, "How can anyoneput such nonsense into a child's head! what absurd fancies there are!"

But to little Ida, all these stories which the student told herabout the flowers, seemed very droll, and she thought over them agreat deal. The flowers did hang their heads, because they had beendancing all night, and were very tired, and most likely they were ill.Then she took them into the room where a number of toys lay on apretty little table, and the whole of the table drawer besides wasfull of beautiful things. Her doll Sophy lay in the doll's bed asleep,and little Ida said to her, "You must really get up Sophy, and becontent to lie in the drawer to-night; the poor flowers are ill, andthey must lie in your bed, then perhaps they will get well again."So she took the doll out, who looked quite cross, and said not asingle word, for she was angry at being turned out of her bed. Idaplaced the flowers in the doll's bed, and drew the quilt over them.Then she told them to lie quite still and be good, while she made sometea for them, so that they might be quite well and able to get upthe next morning. And she drew the curtains close round the littlebed, so that the sun might not shine in their eyes. During the wholeevening she could not help thinking of what the student had toldher. And before she went to bed herself, she was obliged to peepbehind the curtains into the garden where all her mother's beautifulflowers grew, hyacinths and tulips, and many others. Then shewhispered to them quite softly, "I know you are going to a ballto-night." But the flowers appeared as if they did not understand, andnot a leaf moved; still Ida felt quite sure she knew all about it. Shelay awake a long time after she was in bed, thinking how pretty itmust be to see all the beautiful flowers dancing in the king's garden."I wonder if my flowers have really been there," she said toherself, and then she fell asleep. In the night she awoke; she hadbeen dreaming of the flowers and of the student, as well as of thetiresome lawyer who found fault with him. It was quite still inIda's bedroom; the night-lamp burnt on the table, and her father andmother were asleep. "I wonder if my flowers are still lying in Sophy'sbed," she thought to herself; "how much I should like to know." Sheraised herself a little, and glanced at the door of the room where allher flowers and playthings lay; it was partly open, and as shelistened, it seemed as if some one in the room was playing thepiano, but softly and more prettily than she had ever before heard it."Now all the flowers are certainly dancing in there," she thought, "ohhow much I should like to see them," but she did not dare move forfear of disturbing her father and mother. "If they would only comein here," she thought; but they did not come, and the musiccontinued to play so beautifully, and was so pretty, that she couldresist no longer. She crept out of her little bed, went softly tothe door and looked into the room. Oh what a splendid sight therewas to be sure! There was no night-lamp burning, but the room appearedquite light, for the moon shone through the window upon the floor, andmade it almost like day. All the hyacinths and tulips stood in twolong rows down the room, not a single flower remained in the window,and the flower-pots were all empty. The flowers were dancinggracefully on the floor, making turns and holding each other bytheir long green leaves as they swung round. At the piano sat alarge yellow lily which little Ida was sure she had seen in thesummer, for she remembered the student saying she was very much likeMiss Lina, one of Ida's friends. They all laughed at him then, but nowit seemed to little Ida as if the tall, yellow flower was reallylike the young lady. She had just the same manners while playing,bending her long yellow face from side to side, and nodding in time tothe beautiful music. Then she saw a large purple crocus jump intothe middle of the table where the playthings stood, go up to thedoll's bedstead and draw back the curtains; there lay the sickflowers, but they got up directly, and nodded to the others as asign that they wished to dance with them. The old rough doll, with thebroken mouth, stood up and bowed to the pretty flowers. They did notlook ill at all now, but jumped about and were very merry, yet none ofthem noticed little Ida. Presently it seemed as if something fell fromthe table. Ida looked that way, and saw a slight carnival rodjumping down among the flowers as if it belonged to them; it was,however, very smooth and neat, and a little wax doll with a broadbrimmed hat on her head, like the one worn by the lawyer, sat upon it.The carnival rod hopped about among the flowers on its three redstilted feet, and stamped quite loud when it danced the Mazurka; theflowers could not perform this dance, they were too light to stampin that manner. All at once the wax doll which rode on the carnivalrod seemed to grow larger and taller, and it turned round and saidto the paper flowers, "How can you put such things in a child'shead? they are all foolish fancies;" and then the doll was exactlylike the lawyer with the broad brimmed hat, and looked as yellow andas cross as he did; but the paper dolls struck him on his thin legs,and he shrunk up again and became quite a little wax doll. This wasvery amusing, and Ida could not help laughing. The carnival rod wenton dancing, and the lawyer was obliged to dance also. It was no use,he might make himself great and tall, or remain a little wax doll witha large black hat; still he must dance. Then at last the other flowersinterceded for him, especially those who had lain in the doll's bed,and the carnival rod gave up his dancing. At the same moment a loudknocking was heard in the drawer, where Ida's doll Sophy lay with manyother toys. Then the rough doll ran to the end of the table, laidhimself flat down upon it, and began to pull the drawer out a littleway.

Then Sophy raised himself, and looked round quite astonished,"There must be a ball here to-night," said Sophy. "Why did notsomebody tell me?"

"Will you dance with me?" said the rough doll.

"You are the right sort to dance with, certainly," said she,turning her back upon him.

Then she seated herself on the edge of the drawer, and thoughtthat perhaps one of the flowers would ask her to dance; but none ofthem came. Then she coughed, "Hem, hem, a-hem;" but for all that notone came. The shabby doll now danced quite alone, and not verybadly, after all. As none of the flowers seemed to notice Sophy, shelet herself down from the drawer to the floor, so as to make a verygreat noise. All the flowers came round her directly, and asked if shehad hurt herself, especially those who had lain in her bed. But shewas not hurt at all, and Ida's flowers thanked her for the use ofthe nice bed, and were very kind to her. They led her into themiddle of the room, where the moon shone, and danced with her, whileall the other flowers formed a circle round them. Then Sophy wasvery happy, and said they might keep her bed; she did not mind lyingin the drawer at all. But the flowers thanked her very much, andsaid,-

"We cannot live long. To-morrow morning we shall be quite dead;and you must tell little Ida to bury us in the garden, near to thegrave of the canary; then, in the summer we shall wake up and bemore beautiful than ever."

"No, you must not die," said Sophy, as she kissed the flowers.

Then the door of the room opened, and a number of beautifulflowers danced in. Ida could not imagine where they could come from,unless they were the flowers from the king's garden. First came twolovely roses, with little golden crowns on their heads; these were theking and queen. Beautiful stocks and carnations followed, bowing toevery one present. They had also music with them. Large poppies andpeonies had pea-shells for instruments, and blew into them till theywere quite red in the face. The bunches of blue hyacinths and thelittle white snowdrops jingled their bell-like flowers, as if theywere real bells. Then came many more flowers: blue violets, purpleheart's-ease, daisies, and lilies of the valley, and they all dancedtogether, and kissed each other. It was very beautiful to behold.

At last the flowers wished each other good-night. Then littleIda crept back into her bed again, and dreamt of all she had seen.When she arose the next morning, she went quickly to the little table,to see if the flowers were still there. She drew aside the curtains ofthe little bed. There they all lay, but quite faded; much more so thanthe day before. Sophy was lying in the drawer where Ida had placedher; but she looked very sleepy.

"Do you remember what the flowers told you to say to me?" saidlittle Ida. But Sophy looked quite stupid, and said not a single word.

"You are not kind at all," said Ida; "and yet they all danced withyou."

Then she took a little paper box, on which were paintedbeautiful birds, and laid the dead flowers in it.

"This shall be your pretty coffin," she said; "and by and by, whenmy cousins come to visit me, they shall help me to bury you out in thegarden; so that next summer you may grow up again more beautifulthan ever."

Her cousins were two good-tempered boys, whose names were Jamesand Adolphus. Their father had given them each a bow and arrow, andthey had brought them to show Ida. She told them about the poorflowers which were dead; and as soon as they obtained permission, theywent with her to bury them. The two boys walked first, with theircrossbows on their shoulders, and little Ida followed, carrying thepretty box containing the dead flowers. They dug a little grave in thegarden. Ida kissed her flowers and then laid them, with the box, inthe earth. James and Adolphus then fired their crossbows over thegrave, as they had neither guns nor cannons.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   LITTLE TINY OR THUMBELINA

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once a woman who wished very much to have a littlechild, but she could not obtain her wish. At last she went to a fairy,and said, "I should so very much like to have a little child; canyou tell me where I can find one?"

"Oh, that can be easily managed," said the fairy. "Here is abarleycorn of a different kind to those which grow in the farmer'sfields, and which the chickens eat; put it into a flower-pot, andsee what will happen."

"Thank you," said the woman, and she gave the fairy twelveshillings, which was the price of the barleycorn. Then she went homeand planted it, and immediately there grew up a large handsome flower,something like a tulip in appearance, but with its leaves tightlyclosed as if it were still a bud. "It is a beautiful flower," said thewoman, and she kissed the red and golden-colored leaves, and while shedid so the flower opened, and she could see that it was a realtulip. Within the flower, upon the green velvet stamens, sat a verydelicate and graceful little maiden. She was scarcely half as longas a thumb, and they gave her the name of "Thumbelina," or Tiny,because she was so small. A walnut-shell, elegantly polished, servedher for a cradle; her bed was formed of blue violet-leaves, with arose-leaf for a counterpane. Here she slept at night, but during theday she amused herself on a table, where the woman had placed aplateful of water. Round this plate were wreaths of flowers with theirstems in the water, and upon it floated a large tulip-leaf, whichserved Tiny for a boat. Here the little maiden sat and rowed herselffrom side to side, with two oars made of white horse-hair. It reallywas a very pretty sight. Tiny could, also, sing so softly andsweetly that nothing like her singing had ever before been heard.One night, while she lay in her pretty bed, a large, ugly, wet toadcrept through a broken pane of glass in the window, and leaped rightupon the table where Tiny lay sleeping under her rose-leaf quilt."What a pretty little wife this would make for my son, said thetoad, and she took up the walnut-shell in which little Tiny layasleep, and jumped through the window with it into the garden.

In the swampy margin of a broad stream in the garden lived thetoad, with her son. He was uglier even than his mother, and when hesaw the pretty little maiden in her elegant bed, he could only cry,"Croak, croak, croak."

"Don't speak so loud, or she will wake," said the toad, "andthen she might run away, for she is as light as swan's down. We willplace her on one of the water-lily leaves out in the stream; it willbe like an island to her, she is so light and small, and then shecannot escape; and, while she is away, we will make haste andprepare the state-room under the marsh, in which you are to livewhen you are married."

Far out in the stream grew a number of water-lilies, with broadgreen leaves, which seemed to float on the top of the water. Thelargest of these leaves appeared farther off than the rest, and theold toad swam out to it with the walnut-shell, in which little Tinylay still asleep. The tiny little creature woke very early in themorning, and began to cry bitterly when she found where she was, forshe could see nothing but water on every side of the large green leaf,and no way of reaching the land. Meanwhile the old toad was verybusy under the marsh, decking her room with rushes and wild yellowflowers, to make it look pretty for her new daughter-in-law. Thenshe swam out with her ugly son to the leaf on which she had placedpoor little Tiny. She wanted to fetch the pretty bed, that she mightput it in the bridal chamber to be ready for her. The old toad bowedlow to her in the water, and said, "Here is my son, he will be yourhusband, and you will live happily in the marsh by the stream."

"Croak, croak, croak," was all her son could say for himself; sothe toad took up the elegant little bed, and swam away with it,leaving Tiny all alone on the green leaf, where she sat and wept.She could not bear to think of living with the old toad, and havingher ugly son for a husband. The little fishes, who swam about in thewater beneath, had seen the toad, and heard what she said, so theylifted their heads above the water to look at the little maiden. Assoon as they caught sight of her, they saw she was very pretty, and itmade them very sorry to think that she must go and live with theugly toads. "No, it must never be!" so they assembled together inthe water, round the green stalk which held the leaf on which thelittle maiden stood, and gnawed it away at the root with theirteeth. Then the leaf floated down the stream, carrying Tiny far awayout of reach of land.

Tiny sailed past many towns, and the little birds in the bushessaw her, and sang, "What a lovely little creature;" so the leaf swamaway with her farther and farther, till it brought her to other lands.A graceful little white butterfly constantly fluttered round her,and at last alighted on the leaf. Tiny pleased him, and she was gladof it, for now the toad could not possibly reach her, and thecountry through which she sailed was beautiful, and the sun shone uponthe water, till it glittered like liquid gold. She took off her girdleand tied one end of it round the butterfly, and the other end of theribbon she fastened to the leaf, which now glided on much fasterthan ever, taking little Tiny with it as she stood. Presently alarge cockchafer flew by; the moment he caught sight of her, he seizedher round her delicate waist with his claws, and flew with her intoa tree. The green leaf floated away on the brook, and the butterflyflew with it, for he was fastened to it, and could not get away.

Oh, how frightened little Tiny felt when the cockchafer flewwith her to the tree! But especially was she sorry for the beautifulwhite butterfly which she had fastened to the leaf, for if he couldnot free himself he would die of hunger. But the cockchafer did nottrouble himself at all about the matter. He seated himself by her sideon a large green leaf, gave her some honey from the flowers to eat,and told her she was very pretty, though not in the least like acockchafer. After a time, all the cockchafers turned up their feelers,and said, "She has only two legs! how ugly that looks." "She has nofeelers," said another. "Her waist is quite slim. Pooh! she is likea human being."

"Oh! she is ugly," said all the lady cockchafers, although Tinywas very pretty. Then the cockchafer who had run away with her,believed all the others when they said she was ugly, and would havenothing more to say to her, and told her she might go where she liked.Then he flew down with her from the tree, and placed her on a daisy,and she wept at the thought that she was so ugly that even thecockchafers would have nothing to say to her. And all the while shewas really the loveliest creature that one could imagine, and astender and delicate as a beautiful rose-leaf. During the wholesummer poor little Tiny lived quite alone in the wide forest. She woveherself a bed with blades of grass, and hung it up under a broad leaf,to protect herself from the rain. She sucked the honey from theflowers for food, and drank the dew from their leaves every morning.So passed away the summer and the autumn, and then came the winter,-the long, cold winter. All the birds who had sung to her so sweetlywere flown away, and the trees and the flowers had withered. The largeclover leaf under the shelter of which she had lived, was now rolledtogether and shrivelled up, nothing remained but a yellow witheredstalk. She felt dreadfully cold, for her clothes were torn, and shewas herself so frail and delicate, that poor little Tiny was nearlyfrozen to death. It began to snow too; and the snow-flakes, as theyfell upon her, were like a whole shovelful falling upon one of us, forwe are tall, but she was only an inch high. Then she wrapped herselfup in a dry leaf, but it cracked in the middle and could not keepher warm, and she shivered with cold. Near the wood in which she hadbeen living lay a corn-field, but the corn had been cut a long time;nothing remained but the bare dry stubble standing up out of thefrozen ground. It was to her like struggling through a large wood. Oh!how she shivered with the cold. She came at last to the door of afield-mouse, who had a little den under the corn-stubble. Theredwelt the field-mouse in warmth and comfort, with a whole roomful ofcorn, a kitchen, and a beautiful dining room. Poor little Tiny stoodbefore the door just like a little beggar-girl, and begged for a smallpiece of barley-corn, for she had been without a morsel to eat for twodays.

"You poor little creature," said the field-mouse, who was really agood old field-mouse, "come into my warm room and dine with me." Shewas very pleased with Tiny, so she said, "You are quite welcome tostay with me all the winter, if you like; but you must keep my roomsclean and neat, and tell me stories, for I shall like to hear themvery much." And Tiny did all the field-mouse asked her, and foundherself very comfortable.

"We shall have a visitor soon," said the field-mouse one day;"my neighbor pays me a visit once a week. He is better off than Iam; he has large rooms, and wears a beautiful black velvet coat. Ifyou could only have him for a husband, you would be well providedfor indeed. But he is blind, so you must tell him some of yourprettiest stories.

But Tiny did not feel at all interested about this neighbor, forhe was a mole. However, he came and paid his visit dressed in hisblack velvet coat.

"He is very rich and learned, and his house is twenty times largerthan mine," said the field-mouse.

He was rich and learned, no doubt, but he always spoke slightinglyof the sun and the pretty flowers, because he had never seen them.Tiny was obliged to sing to him, "Lady-bird, lady-bird, fly awayhome," and many other pretty songs. And the mole fell in love with herbecause she had such a sweet voice; but he said nothing yet, for hewas very cautious. A short time before, the mole had dug a longpassage under the earth, which led from the dwelling of thefield-mouse to his own, and here she had permission to walk withTiny whenever she liked. But he warned them not to be alarmed at thesight of a dead bird which lay in the passage. It was a perfectbird, with a beak and feathers, and could not have been dead long, andwas lying just where the mole had made his passage. The mole took apiece of phosphorescent wood in his mouth, and it glittered likefire in the dark; then he went before them to light them through thelong, dark passage. When they came to the spot where lay the deadbird, the mole pushed his broad nose through the ceiling, the earthgave way, so that there was a large hole, and the daylight shoneinto the passage. In the middle of the floor lay a dead swallow, hisbeautiful wings pulled close to his sides, his feet and his head drawnup under his feathers; the poor bird had evidently died of the cold.It made little Tiny very sad to see it, she did so love the littlebirds; all the summer they had sung and twittered for her sobeautifully. But the mole pushed it aside with his crooked legs, andsaid, "He will sing no more now. How miserable it must be to be born alittle bird! I am thankful that none of my children will ever bebirds, for they can do nothing but cry, 'Tweet, tweet,' and always dieof hunger in the winter."

"Yes, you may well say that, as a clever man!" exclaimed thefield-mouse, "What is the use of his twittering, for when winter comeshe must either starve or be frozen to death. Still birds are very highbred."

Tiny said nothing; but when the two others had turned theirbacks on the bird, she stooped down and stroked aside the softfeathers which covered the head, and kissed the closed eyelids."Perhaps this was the one who sang to me so sweetly in the summer,"she said; "and how much pleasure it gave me, you dear, pretty bird."

The mole now stopped up the hole through which the daylight shone,and then accompanied the lady home. But during the night Tiny couldnot sleep; so she got out of bed and wove a large, beautiful carpet ofhay; then she carried it to the dead bird, and spread it over him;with some down from the flowers which she had found in thefield-mouse's room. It was as soft as wool, and she spread some ofit on each side of the bird, so that he might lie warmly in the coldearth. "Farewell, you pretty little bird," said she, "farewell;thank you for your delightful singing during the summer, when allthe trees were green, and the warm sun shone upon us. Then she laidher head on the bird's breast, but she was alarmed immediately, for itseemed as if something inside the bird went "thump, thump." It was thebird's heart; he was not really dead, only benumbed with the cold, andthe warmth had restored him to life. In autumn, all the swallows flyaway into warm countries, but if one happens to linger, the coldseizes it, it becomes frozen, and falls down as if dead; it remainswhere it fell, and the cold snow covers it. Tiny trembled very much;she was quite frightened, for the bird was large, a great deallarger than herself,- she was only an inch high. But she took courage,laid the wool more thickly over the poor swallow, and then took a leafwhich she had used for her own counterpane, and laid it over thehead of the poor bird. The next morning she again stole out to seehim. He was alive but very weak; he could only open his eyes for amoment to look at Tiny, who stood by holding a piece of decayed woodin her hand, for she had no other lantern. "Thank you, pretty littlemaiden," said the sick swallow; "I have been so nicely warmed, thatI shall soon regain my strength, and be able to fly about again in thewarm sunshine."

"Oh," said she, "it is cold out of doors now; it snows andfreezes. Stay in your warm bed; I will take care of you."

Then she brought the swallow some water in a flower-leaf, andafter he had drank, he told her that he had wounded one of his wingsin a thorn-bush, and could not fly as fast as the others, who weresoon far away on their journey to warm countries. Then at last hehad fallen to the earth, and could remember no more, nor how he cameto be where she had found him. The whole winter the swallow remainedunderground, and Tiny nursed him with care and love. Neither themole nor the field-mouse knew anything about it, for they did not likeswallows. Very soon the spring time came, and the sun warmed theearth. Then the swallow bade farewell to Tiny, and she opened the holein the ceiling which the mole had made. The sun shone in upon themso beautifully, that the swallow asked her if she would go with him;she could sit on his back, he said, and he would fly away with herinto the green woods. But Tiny knew it would make the field-mouse verygrieved if she left her in that manner, so she said, "No, I cannot."

"Farewell, then, farewell, you good, pretty little maiden," saidthe swallow; and he flew out into the sunshine.

Tiny looked after him, and the tears rose in her eyes. She wasvery fond of the poor swallow.

"Tweet, tweet," sang the bird, as he flew out into the greenwoods, and Tiny felt very sad. She was not allowed to go out intothe warm sunshine. The corn which had been sown in the field overthe house of the field-mouse had grown up high into the air, andformed a thick wood to Tiny, who was only an inch in height.

"You are going to be married, Tiny," said the field-mouse. "Myneighbor has asked for you. What good fortune for a poor child likeyou. Now we will prepare your wedding clothes. They must be bothwoollen and linen. Nothing must be wanting when you are the mole'swife."

Tiny had to turn the spindle, and the field-mouse hired fourspiders, who were to weave day and night. Every evening the molevisited her, and was continually speaking of the time when thesummer would be over. Then he would keep his wedding-day with Tiny;but now the heat of the sun was so great that it burned the earth, andmade it quite hard, like a stone. As soon, as the summer was over, thewedding should take place. But Tiny was not at all pleased; for shedid not like the tiresome mole. Every morning when the sun rose, andevery evening when it went down, she would creep out at the door,and as the wind blew aside the ears of corn, so that she could see theblue sky, she thought how beautiful and bright it seemed out there,and wished so much to see her dear swallow again. But he neverreturned; for by this time he had flown far away into the lovely greenforest.

When autumn arrived, Tiny had her outfit quite ready; and thefield-mouse said to her, "In four weeks the wedding must take place."

Then Tiny wept, and said she would not marry the disagreeablemole.

"Nonsense," replied the field-mouse. "Now don't be obstinate, or Ishall bite you with my white teeth. He is a very handsome mole; thequeen herself does not wear more beautiful velvets and furs. Hiskitchen and cellars are quite full. You ought to be very thankfulfor such good fortune."

So the wedding-day was fixed, on which the mole was to fetchTiny away to live with him, deep under the earth, and never again tosee the warm sun, because he did not like it. The poor child wasvery unhappy at the thought of saying farewell to the beautiful sun,and as the field-mouse had given her permission to stand at thedoor, she went to look at it once more.

"Farewell bright sun," she cried, stretching out her arm towardsit; and then she walked a short distance from the house; for thecorn had been cut, and only the dry stubble remained in the fields."Farewell, farewell," she repeated, twining her arm round a little redflower that grew just by her side. "Greet the little swallow fromme, if you should see him again."

"Tweet, tweet," sounded over her head suddenly. She looked up, andthere was the swallow himself flying close by. As soon as he spiedTiny, he was delighted; and then she told him how unwilling she feltto marry the ugly mole, and to live always beneath the earth, andnever to see the bright sun any more. And as she told him she wept.

"Cold winter is coming," said the swallow, "and I am going tofly away into warmer countries. Will you go with me? You can sit on myback, and fasten yourself on with your sash. Then we can fly away fromthe ugly mole and his gloomy rooms,- far away, over the mountains,into warmer countries, where the sun shines more brightly- thanhere; where it is always summer, and the flowers bloom in greaterbeauty. Fly now with me, dear little Tiny; you saved my life when Ilay frozen in that dark passage."

"Yes, I will go with you," said Tiny; and she seated herself onthe bird's back, with her feet on his outstretched wings, and tied hergirdle to one of his strongest feathers.

Then the swallow rose in the air, and flew over forest and oversea, high above the highest mountains, covered with eternal snow. Tinywould have been frozen in the cold air, but she crept under the bird'swarm feathers, keeping her little head uncovered, so that she mightadmire the beautiful lands over which they passed. At length theyreached the warm countries, where the sun shines brightly, and the skyseems so much higher above the earth. Here, on the hedges, and bythe wayside, grew purple, green, and white grapes; lemons andoranges hung from trees in the woods; and the air was fragrant withmyrtles and orange blossoms. Beautiful children ran along thecountry lanes, playing with large gay butterflies; and as theswallow flew farther and farther, every place appeared still morelovely.

At last they came to a blue lake, and by the side of it, shaded bytrees of the deepest green, stood a palace of dazzling white marble,built in the olden times. Vines clustered round its lofty pillars, andat the top were many swallows' nests, and one of these was the home ofthe swallow who carried Tiny.

"This is my house," said the swallow; "but it would not do for youto live there- you would not be comfortable. You must choose foryourself one of those lovely flowers, and I will put you down upon it,and then you shall have everything that you can wish to make youhappy."

"That will be delightful," she said, and clapped her littlehands for joy.

A large marble pillar lay on the ground, which, in falling, hadbeen broken into three pieces. Between these pieces grew the mostbeautiful large white flowers; so the swallow flew down with Tiny, andplaced her on one of the broad leaves. But how surprised she was tosee in the middle of the flower, a tiny little man, as white andtransparent as if he had been made of crystal! He had a gold crownon his head, and delicate wings at his shoulders, and was not muchlarger than Tiny herself. He was the angel of the flower; for a tinyman and a tiny woman dwell in every flower; and this was the king ofthem all.

"Oh, how beautiful he is!" whispered Tiny to the swallow.

The little prince was at first quite frightened at the bird, whowas like a giant, compared to such a delicate little creature ashimself; but when he saw Tiny, he was delighted, and thought her theprettiest little maiden he had ever seen. He took the gold crownfrom his head, and placed it on hers, and asked her name, and if shewould be his wife, and queen over all the flowers.

This certainly was a very different sort of husband to the sonof a toad, or the mole, with my black velvet and fur; so she said,"Yes," to the handsome prince. Then all the flowers opened, and out ofeach came a little lady or a tiny lord, all so pretty it was quite apleasure to look at them. Each of them brought Tiny a present; but thebest gift was a pair of beautiful wings, which had belonged to a largewhite fly and they fastened them to Tiny's shoulders, so that shemight fly from flower to flower. Then there was much rejoicing, andthe little swallow who sat above them, in his nest, was asked tosing a wedding song, which he did as well as he could; but in hisheart he felt sad for he was very fond of Tiny, and would have likednever to part from her again.

"You must not be called Tiny any more," said the spirit of theflowers to her. "It is an ugly name, and you are so very pretty. Wewill call you Maia."

"Farewell, farewell," said the swallow, with a heavy heart as heleft the warm countries to fly back into Denmark. There he had anest over the window of a house in which dwelt the writer of fairytales. The swallow sang, "Tweet, tweet," and from his song came thewhole story.

 THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   LITTLE TUK

   by Hans Christian Andersen

YES, they called him Little Tuk, but it was not his real name;he had called himself so before he could speak plainly, and he meantit for Charles. It was all very well for those who knew him, but notfor strangers.

Little Tuk was left at home to take care of his little sister,Gustava, who was much younger than himself, and he had to learn hislessons at the same time, and the two things could not very well beperformed together. The poor boy sat there with his sister on his lap,and sung to her all the songs he knew, and now and then he looked intohis geography lesson that lay open before him. By the next morninghe had to learn by heart all the towns in Zealand, and all thatcould be described of them.

His mother came home at last, and took little Gustava in her arms.Then Tuk ran to the window, and read so eagerly that he nearly readhis eyes out; for it had become darker and darker every minute, andhis mother had no money to buy a light.

"There goes the old washerwoman up the lane," said the mother,as she looked out of the window; "the poor woman can hardly dragherself along, and now she had to drag a pail of water from thewell. Be a good boy, Tuk, and run across and help the old woman, won'tyou?"

So Tuk ran across quickly, and helped her, but when he came backinto the room it was quite dark, and there was not a word said about alight, so he was obliged to go to bed on his little trucklebedstead, and there he lay and thought of his geography lesson, and ofZealand, and of all the master had told him. He ought really to haveread it over again, but he could not for want of light. So he putthe geography book under his pillow, for he had heard that this wasa great help towards learning a lesson, but not always to bedepended upon. He still lay thinking and thinking, when all at once itseemed as if some one kissed him on his eyes and mouth. He slept andyet he did not sleep; and it appeared as if the old washerwoman lookedat him with kind eyes and said, "It would be a great pity if you didnot know your lesson to-morrow morning; you helped me, and now Iwill help you, and Providence will always keep those who helpthemselves;" and at the same time the book under Tuk's pillow began tomove about. "Cluck, cluck, cluck," cried a hen as she crept towardshim. "I am a hen from Kjoge," and then she told him how manyinhabitants the town contained, and about a battle that had beenfought there, which really was not worth speaking of.

"Crack, crack," down fell something. It was a wooden bird, theparrot which is used as a target as Prastoe. He said there were asmany inhabitants in that town as he had nails in his body. He was veryproud, and said, "Thorwalsden lived close to me, and here I am now,quite comfortable."

But now little Tuk was no longer in bed; all in a moment hefound himself on horseback. Gallop, gallop, away he went, seated infront of a richly-attired knight, with a waving plume, who held him onthe saddle, and so they rode through the wood by the old town ofWordingburg, which was very large and busy. The king's castle wassurrounded by lofty towers, and radiant light streamed from all thewindows. Within there were songs and dancing; King Waldemar and theyoung gayly-dressed ladies of the court were dancing together. Morningdawned, and as the sun rose, the whole city and the king's castle sanksuddenly down together. One tower after another fell, till at lastonly one remained standing on the hill where the castle had formerlybeen.

The town now appeared small and poor, and the school-boys readin their books, which they carried under their arms, that it containedtwo thousand inhabitants; but this was a mere boast, for it did notcontain so many.

And again little Tuk lay in his bed, scarcely knowing whether hewas dreaming or not, for some one stood by him.

"Tuk! little Tuk!" said a voice. It was a very little person whospoke. He was dressed as a sailor, and looked small enough to be amiddy, but he was not one. "I bring you many greetings from Corsor. Itis a rising town, full of life. It has steamships and mail-coaches. Intimes past they used to call it ugly, but that is no longer true. Ilie on the sea-shore," said Corsor; "I have high-roads andpleasure-gardens; I have given birth to a poet who was witty andentertaining, which they are not all. I once wanted to fit out aship to sail round the world, but I did not accomplish it, though mostlikely I might have done so. But I am fragrant with perfume, for closeto my gates most lovely roses bloom."

Then before the eyes of little Tuk appeared a confusion of colors,red and green; but it cleared off, and he could distinguish a cliffclose to the bay, the slopes of which were quite overgrown withverdure, and on its summit stood a fine old church with pointedtowers. Springs of water flowed out of the cliff in thick waterspouts,so that there was a continual splashing. Close by sat an old king witha golden crown on his white head. This was King Hroar of the Springsand near the springs stood the town of Roeskilde, as it is called.Then all the kings and queens of Denmark went up the ascent to the oldchurch, hand in hand, with golden crowns on their heads, while theorgan played and the fountains sent forth jets of water.

Little Tuk saw and heard it all. "Don't forget the names ofthese towns," said King Hroar.

All at once everything vanished; but where! It seemed to himlike turning over the leaves of a book. And now there stood before himan old peasant woman, who had come from Soroe where the grass grows inthe market-place. She had a green linen apron thrown over her head andshoulders, and it was quite wet, as if it had been raining heavily."Yes, that it has," said she, and then, just as she was going totell him a great many pretty stories from Holberg's comedies, andabout Waldemar and Absalom, she suddenly shrunk up together, andwagged her head as if she were a frog about to spring. "Croak," shecried; "it is always wet, and as quiet as death in Soroe." Then littleTuk saw she was changed into a frog. "Croak," and again she was an oldwoman. "One must dress according to the weather," said she. "It iswet, and my town is just like a bottle. By the cork we must go in, andby the cork we must come out again. In olden times I had beautifulfish, and now I have fresh, rosy-cheeked boys in the bottom of thebottle, and they learn wisdom, Hebrew and Greek."

"Croak." How it sounded like the cry of the frogs on the moor,or like the creaking of great boots when some one is marching,- alwaysthe same tone, so monotonous and wearing, that little Tuk at lengthfell fast asleep, and then the sound could not annoy him. But evenin this sleep came a dream or something like it. His little sisterGustava, with her blue eyes, and fair curly hair, had grown up abeautiful maiden all at once, and without having wings she couldfly. And they flew together over Zealand, over green forests andblue lakes.

"Hark, so you hear the cock crow, little Tuk. 'Cock-a-doodle-doo.'The fowls are flying out of Kjoge. You shall have a large farm-yard.You shall never suffer hunger or want. The bird of good omen shallbe yours, and you shall become a rich and happy man; your houseshall rise up like King Waldemar's towers, and shall be richly adornedwith marble statues, like those at Prastoe. Understand me well; yourname shall travel with fame round the world like the ship that wasto sail from Corsor, and at Roeskilde,- Don't forget the names ofthe towns, as King Hroar said,- you shall speak well and clearlylittle Tuk, and when at last you lie in your grave you shall sleeppeacefully, as-"

"As if I lay in Soroe," said little Tuk awaking. It was brightdaylight, and he could not remember his dream, but that was notnecessary, for we are not to know what will happen to us in thefuture. Then he sprang out of bed quickly, and read over his lesson inthe book, and knew it all at once quite correctly. The old washerwomanput her head in at the door, and nodded to him quite kindly, and said,"Many thanks, you good child, for your help yesterday. I hope all yourbeautiful dreams will come true."

Little Tuk did not at all know what he had dreamt, but One abovedid.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

  OLE THE TOWER-KEEPER

   by Hans Christian Andersen

"IN the world it's always going up and down; and now I can't go upany higher!" So said Ole the tower-keeper. "Most people have to tryboth the ups and the downs; and, rightly considered, we all get tobe watchmen at last, and look down upon life from a height."

Such was the speech of Ole, my friend, the old tower-keeper, astrange, talkative old fellow, who seemed to speak out everything thatcame into his head, and who for all that had many a serious thoughtdeep in his heart. Yes, he was the child of respectable people, andthere were even some who said that he was the son of a privycouncillor, or that he might have been. He had studied, too, and hadbeen assistant teacher and deputy clerk; but of what service was allthat to him? In those days he lived in the clerk's house, and was tohave everything in the house- to be at free quarters, as the sayingis; but he was still, so to speak, a fine young gentleman. He wantedto have his boots cleaned with patent blacking, and the clerk couldonly afford ordinary grease; and upon that point they split. One spokeof stinginess, the other of vanity, and the blacking became theblack cause of enmity between them, and at last they parted.

This is what he demanded of the world in general, namely, patentblacking, and he got nothing but grease. Accordingly, he at lastdrew back from all men, and became a hermit; but the church tower isthe only place in a great city where hermitage, office and bread canbe found together. So he betook himself up thither, and smoked hispipe as he made his solitary rounds. He looked upward and downward,and had his own thoughts, and told in his own way of what he read inbooks and in himself. I often lent him books- good books; and youmay know by the company he keeps. He loved neither the Englishgoverness novels nor the French ones, which he called a mixture ofempty wind and raisin-stalks: he wanted biographies, anddescriptions of the wonders of, the world. I visited him at least oncea year, generally directly after New Year's day, and then he alwaysspoke of this and that which the change of the year had put into hishead.

I will tell the story of three of these visits, and will reproducehis own words whenever I can remember them.

  FIRST VISIT

Among the books which I had lately lent Ole, was one which hadgreatly rejoiced and occupied him. It was a geological book,containing an account of the boulders.

"Yes, they're rare old fellows, those boulders!" he said; "andto think that we should pass them without noticing them! And overthe street pavement, the paving stones, those fragments of theoldest remains of antiquity, one walks without ever thinking aboutthem. I have done the very thing myself. But now I look respectfullyat every paving-stone. Many thanks for the book! It has filled me withthought, and has made me long to read more on the subject. The romanceof the earth is, after all, the most wonderful of all romances. It's apity one can't read the first volume of it, because it is written in alanguage that we don't understand. One must read in the differentstrata, in the pebble-stones, for each separate period. Yes, it is aromance, a very wonderful romance, and we all have our place in it. Wegrope and ferret about, and yet remain where we are; but the ballkeeps turning, without emptying the ocean over us; the clod on whichwe move about, holds, and does not let us through. And then it's astory that has been acting for thousands upon thousands of years andis still going on. My best thanks for the book about the boulders.Those are fellows indeed! They could tell us something worthhearing, if they only knew how to talk. It's really a pleasure now andthen to become a mere nothing, especially when a man is as highlyplaced as I am. And then to think that we all, even with patentlacquer, are nothing more than insects of a moment on that ant-hillthe earth, though we may be insects with stars and garters, places andoffices! One feels quite a novice beside these venerablemillion-year-old boulders. On last New Year's eve I was reading thebook, and had lost myself in it so completely, that I forgot myusual New Year's diversion, namely, the wild hunt to Amack. Ah, youdon't know what that is!

"The journey of the witches on broomsticks is well enough known-that journey is taken on St. John's eve, to the Brocken; but we have awild journey, also which is national and modern, and that is thejourney to Amack on the night of the New Year. All indifferent poetsand poetesses, musicians, newspaper writers, and artisticnotabilities,- I mean those who are no good,- ride in the New Year'snight through the air to Amack. They sit backwards on their paintingbrushes or quill pens, for steel pens won't bear them- they're toostiff. As I told you, I see that every New Year's night, and couldmention the majority of the riders by name, but I should not like todraw their enmity upon myself, for they don't like people to talkabout their ride to Amack on quill pens. I've a kind of niece, whois a fishwife, and who, as she tells me, supplies three respectablenewspapers with the terms of abuse and vituperation they use, andshe has herself been at Amack as an invited guest; but she was carriedout thither, for she does not own a quill pen, nor can she ride. Shehas told me all about it. Half of what she said is not true, but theother half gives us information enough. When she was out there, thefestivities began with a song; each of the guests had written hisown song, and each one sang his own song, for he thought that thebest, and it was all one, all the same melody. Then those camemarching up, in little bands, who are only busy with their mouths.There were ringing bells that rang alternately; and then came thelittle drummers that beat their tattoo in the family circle; andacquaintance was made with those who write without putting theirnames, which here means as much as using grease instead of patentblacking; and then there was the beadle with his boy, and the boywas worst off, for in general he gets no notice taken of him; then,too, there was the good street sweeper with his cart, who turns overthe dust-bin, and calls it 'good, very good, remarkably good.' Andin the midst of the pleasure that was afforded by the mere meetingof these folks, there shot up out of the great dirt-heap at Amack astem, a tree, an immense flower, a great mushroom, a perfect roof,which formed a sort of warehouse for the worthy company, for in ithung everything they had given to the world during the Old Year. Outof the tree poured sparks like flames of fire; these were the ideasand thoughts, borrowed from others, which they had used, and which nowgot free and rushed away like so many fireworks. They played at 'thestick burns,' and the young poets played at 'heart-burns,' and thewitlings played off their jests, and the jests rolled away with athundering sound, as if empty pots were being shattered against doors.'It was very amusing!' my niece said; in fact, she said many thingsthat were very malicious but very amusing, but I won't mention them,for a man must be good-natured, and not a carping critic. But you willeasily perceive that when a man once knows the rights of the journeyto Amack, as I know them, it's quite natural that on the New Year'snight one should look out to see the wild chase go by. If in the NewYear I miss certain persons who used to be there, I am sure tonotice others who are new arrivals; but this year I omitted takingmy look at the guests, I bowled away on the boulders, rolled backthrough millions of years, and saw the stones break loose high up inthe north, saw them drifting about on icebergs, long before Noah's arkwas constructed, saw them sink down to the bottom of the sea, andre-appear with a sand-bank, with that one that peered forth from theflood and said, 'This shall be Zealand!' I saw them become thedwelling-place of birds that are unknown to us, and then become theseat of wild chiefs of whom we know nothing, until with their axesthey cut their Runic signs into a few of these stones, which then cameinto the calendar of time. But as for me, I had gone quite beyondall lapse of time, and had become a cipher and a nothing. Then threeor four beautiful falling stars came down, which cleared the air,and gave my thoughts another direction. You know what a falling staris, do you not? The learned men are not at all clear about it. Ihave my own ideas about shooting stars, as the common people in manyparts call them, and my idea is this: How often are silentthanksgivings offered up for one who has done a good and noble action!The thanks are often speechless, but they are not lost for all that. Ithink these thanks are caught up, and the sunbeams bring the silent,hidden thankfulness over the head of the benefactor; and if it be awhole people that has been expressing its gratitude through a longlapse of time, the thankfulness appears as a nosegay of flowers, andat length falls in the form of a shooting star over the good man'sgrave. I am always very much pleased when I see a shooting star,especially in the New Year's night, and then find out for whom thegift of gratitude was intended. Lately a gleaming star fell in thesouthwest, as a tribute of thanksgiving to many- many! 'For whom wasthat star intended?' thought I. It fell, no doubt, on the hill bythe Bay of Plensberg, where the Danebrog waves over the graves ofSchleppegrell, Lasloes, and their comrades. One star also fell inthe midst of the land, fell upon Soro, a flower on the grave ofHolberg, the thanks of the year from a great many - thanks for hischarming plays!

"It is a great and pleasant thought to know that a shooting starfalls upon our graves. On mine certainly none will fall- no sunbeambrings thanks to me, for here there is nothing worthy of thanks. Ishall not get the patent lacquer," said Ole, "for my fate on earthis only grease, after all."

  SECOND VISIT

It was New Year's day, and I went up on the tower. Ole spoke ofthe toasts that were drunk on the transition from the Old Year intothe New- from one grave into the other, as he said. And he told me astory about the glasses, and this story had a very deep meaning. Itwas this:

"When on the New Year's night the clock strikes twelve, the peopleat the table rise up with full glasses in their hands, and drain theseglasses, and drink success to the New Year. They begin the year withthe glass in their hands; that is a good beginning for drunkards. Theybegin the New Year by going to bed, and that's a good beginning fordrones. Sleep is sure to play a great part in the New Year, and theglass likewise. Do you know what dwells in the glass?" asked Ole. "Iwill tell you. There dwell in the glass, first, health, and thenpleasure, then the most complete sensual delight; and misfortune andthe bitterest woe dwell in the glass also. Now, suppose we count theglasses- of course I count the different degrees in the glasses fordifferent people.

"You see, the first glass, that's the glass of health, and in thatthe herb of health is found growing. Put it up on the beam in theceiling, and at the end of the year you may be sitting in the arbor ofhealth.

"If you take the second glass- from this a little bird soarsupward, twittering in guileless cheerfulness, so that a man may listento his song, and perhaps join in 'Fair is life! no downcast looks!Take courage, and march onward!'

"Out of the third glass rises a little winged urchin, who cannotcertainly be called an angel child, for there is goblin blood in hisveins, and he has the spirit of a goblin- not wishing to hurt orharm you, indeed, but very ready to play off tricks upon you. He'llsit at your ear and whisper merry thoughts to you; he'll creep intoyour heart and warm you, so that you grow very merry, and become awit, so far as the wits of the others can judge.

"In the fourth glass is neither herb, bird, nor urchin. In thatglass is the pause drawn by reason, and one may never go beyond thatsign.

"Take the fifth glass, and you will weep at yourself, you willfeel such a deep emotion; or it will affect you in a different way.Out of the glass there will spring with a bang Prince Carnival, ninetimes and extravagantly merry. He'll draw you away with him; you'llforget your dignity, if you have any, and you'll forget more thanyou should or ought to forget. All is dance, song and sound: the maskswill carry you away with them, and the daughters of vanity, clad insilk and satin, will come with loose hair and alluring charms; buttear yourself away if you can!

"The sixth glass! Yes, in that glass sits a demon, in the formof a little, well dressed, attractive and very fascinating man, whothoroughly understands you, agrees with you in everything, and becomesquite a second self to you. He has a lantern with him, to give youlight as he accompanies you home. There is an old legend about a saintwho was allowed to choose one of the seven deadly sins, and whoaccordingly chose drunkenness, which appeared to him the least, butwhich led him to commit all the other six. The man's blood ismingled with that of the demon. It is the sixth glass, and with thatthe germ of all evil shoots up within us; and each one grows up with astrength like that of the grains of mustard-seed, and shoots up into atree, and spreads over the whole world: and most people have no choicebut to go into the oven, to be re-cast in a new form.

"That's the history of the glasses," said the tower-keeper Ole,"and it can be told with lacquer or only with grease; but I give ityou with both!"

   THIRD VISIT

On this occasion I chose the general "moving-day" for my visitto Ole, for on that day it is anything but agreeable down in thestreets in the town; for they are full of sweepings, shreds, andremnants of all sorts, to say nothing of the cast-off rubbish in whichone has to wade about. But this time I happened to see two childrenplaying in this wilderness of sweepings. They were playing at "goingto bed," for the occasion seemed especially favorable for thissport. They crept under the straw, and drew an old bit of raggedcurtain over themselves by way of coverlet. "It was splendid!" theysaid; but it was a little too strong for me, and besides, I wasobliged to mount up on my visit to Ole.

"It's moving-day to day," he said; "streets and houses are likea dust-bin- a large dust-bin; but I'm content with a cartload. I mayget something good out of that, and I really did get something goodout of it once. Shortly after Christmas I was going up the street;it was rough weather, wet and dirty- the right kind of weather tocatch cold in. The dustman was there with his cart, which was full,and looked like a sample of streets on moving-day. At the back ofthe cart stood a fir tree, quite green still, and with tinsel on itstwigs; it had been used on Christmas eve, and now it was thrown outinto the street, and the dustman had stood it up at the back of hiscart. It was droll to look at, or you may say it was mournful- alldepends on what you think of when you see it; and I thought aboutit, and thought this and that of many things that were in the cart: orI might have done so, and that comes to the same thing. There was anold lady's glove, too: I wonder what that was thinking of? Shall Itell you? The glove was lying there, pointing with its little fingerat the tree. 'I'm sorry for the tree,' it thought; 'and I was alsoat the feast, where the chandeliers glittered. My life was, so tospeak, a ball night- a pressure of the hand, and I burst! My memorykeeps dwelling upon that, and I have really nothing else to live for!'This is what the glove thought, or what it might have thought. 'That'sa stupid affair with yonder fir tree,' said the potsherds. You see,potsherds think everything is stupid. 'When one is in thedust-cart,' they said, 'one ought not to give one's self airs and weartinsel. I know that I have been useful in the world- far more usefulthan such a green stick.' This was a view that might be taken, and Idon't think it quite a peculiar one; but for all that, the fir treelooked very well: it was like a little poetry in the dust-heap; andtruly there is dust enough in the streets on moving-day. The way isdifficult and troublesome then, and I feel obliged to run away outof the confusion; or, if I am on the tower, I stay there and lookdown, and it is amusing enough.

"There are the good people below, playing at 'changing houses.'They toil and tug away with their goods and chattels, and thehousehold goblin sits in an old tub and moves with them. All thelittle griefs of the lodging and the family, and the real cares andsorrows, move with them out of the old dwelling into the new; and whatgain is there for them or for us in the whole affair? Yes, there waswritten long ago the good old maxim: 'Think on the great moving-day ofdeath!' That is a serious thought. I hope it is not disagreeable toyou that I should have touched upon it? Death is the most certainmessenger, after all, in spite of his various occupations. Yes,Death is the omnibus conductor, and he is the passport writer, andhe countersigns our service-book, and he is director of the savingsbank of life. Do you understand me? All the deeds of our life, thegreat and the little alike, we put into this savings bank; and whenDeath calls with his omnibus, and we have to step in, and drive withhim into the land of eternity, then on the frontier he gives us ourservice-book as a pass. As a provision for the journey, he takesthis or that good deed we have done, and lets it accompany us; andthis may be very pleasant or very terrific. Nobody has ever escapedthe omnibus journey. There is certainly a talk about one who was notallowed to go- they call him the Wandering Jew: he has to ridebehind the omnibus. If he had been allowed to get in, he would haveescaped the clutches of the poets.

"Just cast your mind's eye into that great omnibus. The society ismixed, for king and beggar, genius and idiot, sit side by side. Theymust go without their property and money; they have only theservice-book and the gift out of the savings bank with them. But whichof our deeds is selected and given to us? Perhaps quite a littleone, one that we have forgotten, but which has been recorded- small asa pea, but the pea can send out a blooming shoot. The poor bumpkin whosat on a low stool in the corner, and was jeered at and flouted,will perhaps have his worn-out stool given him as a provision; and thestool may become a litter in the land of eternity, and rise up then asa throne, gleaming like gold and blooming as an arbor. He who alwayslounged about, and drank the spiced draught of pleasure, that he mightforget the wild things he had done here, will have his barrel given tohim on the journey, and will have to drink from it as they go on;and the drink is bright and clear, so that the thoughts remain pure,and all good and noble feelings are awakened, and he sees and feelswhat in life he could not or would not see; and then he has within himthe punishment, the gnawing worm, which will not die through timeincalculable. If on the glasses there stood written 'oblivion,' on thebarrel 'remembrance' is inscribed.

"When I read a good book, an historical work, I always think atlast of the poetry of what I am reading, and of the omnibus ofdeath, and wonder, which of the hero's deeds Death took out of thesavings bank for him, and what provisions he got on the journey intoeternity. There was once a French king- I have forgotten his name, forthe names of good people are sometimes forgotten, even by me, but itwill come back some day;- there was a king who, during a famine,became the benefactor of his people; and the people raised up to hismemory a monument of snow, with the inscription, 'Quicker than thismelts didst thou bring help!' I fancy that Death, looking back uponthe monument, gave him a single snow-flake as provision, asnow-flake that never melts, and this flake floated over his royalhead, like a white butterfly, into the land of eternity. Thus, too,there was Louis XI. I have remembered his name, for one remembers whatis bad- a trait of him often comes into my thoughts, and I wish onecould say the story is not true. He had his lord high constableexecuted, and he could execute him, right or wrong; but he had theinnocent children of the constable, one seven and the other eightyears old, placed under the scaffold so that the warm blood of theirfather spurted over them, and then he had them sent to the Bastille,and shut up in iron cages, where not even a coverlet was given them toprotect them from the cold. And King Louis sent the executioner tothem every week, and had a tooth pulled out of the head of each,that they might not be too comfortable; and the elder of the boyssaid, 'My mother would die of grief if she knew that my youngerbrother had to suffer so cruelly; therefore pull out two of myteeth, and spare him.' The tears came into the hangman's eyes, but theking's will was stronger than the tears; and every week two littleteeth were brought to him on a silver plate; he had demanded them, andhe had them. I fancy that Death took these two teeth out of thesavings bank of life, and gave them to Louis XI, to carry with himon the great journey into the land of immortality; they fly before himlike two flames of fire; they shine and burn, and they bite him, theinnocent children's teeth.

"Yes, that's a serious journey, the omnibus ride on the greatmoving-day! And when is it to be undertaken? That's just the seriouspart of it. Any day, any hour, any minute, the omnibus may draw up.Which of our deeds will Death take out of the savings bank, and giveto us as provision? Let us think of the moving-day that is notmarked in the calendar."

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   OLE-LUK-OIE, THE DREAM-GOD

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE is nobody in the world who knows so many stories asOle-Luk-Oie, or who can relate them so nicely. In the evening, whilethe children are seated at the table or in their little chairs, hecomes up the stairs very softly, for he walks in his socks, then heopens the doors without the slightest noise, and throws a smallquantity of very fine dust in their eyes, just enough to preventthem from keeping them open, and so they do not see him. Then hecreeps behind them, and blows softly upon their necks, till theirheads begin to droop. But Ole-Luk-Oie does not wish to hurt them,for he is very fond of children, and only wants them to be quietthat he may relate to them pretty stories, and they never are quietuntil they are in bed and asleep. As soon as they are asleep,Ole-Luk-Oie seats himself upon the bed. He is nicely dressed; his coatis made of silken stuff; it is impossible to say of what color, for itchanges from green to red, and from red to blue as he turns fromside to side. Under each arm he carries an umbrella; one of them, withpictures on the inside, he spreads over the good children, and thenthey dream the most beautiful stories the whole night. But the otherumbrella has no pictures, and this he holds over the naughtychildren so that they sleep heavily, and wake in the morning withouthaving dreamed at all.

Now we shall hear how Ole-Luk-Oie came every night during awhole week to the little boy named Hjalmar, and what he told him.There were seven stories, as there are seven days in the week.MONDAY

 MONDAY

"Now pay attention," said Ole-Luk-Oie, in the evening, whenHjalmar was in bed, "and I will decorate the room."

Immediately all the flowers in the flower-pots became large trees,with long branches reaching to the ceiling, and stretching along thewalls, so that the whole room was like a greenhouse. All thebranches were loaded with flowers, each flower as beautiful and asfragrant as a rose; and, had any one tasted them, he would havefound them sweeter even than jam. The fruit glittered like gold, andthere were cakes so full of plums that they were nearly bursting. Itwas incomparably beautiful. At the same time sounded dismal moans fromthe table-drawer in which lay Hjalmar's school books.

"What can that be now?" said Ole-Luk-Oie, going to the table andpulling out the drawer.

It was a slate, in such distress because of a false number inthe sum, that it had almost broken itself to pieces. The pencil pulledand tugged at its string as if it were a little dog that wanted tohelp, but could not.

And then came a moan from Hjalmar's copy-book. Oh, it was quiteterrible to hear! On each leaf stood a row of capital letters, everyone having a small letter by its side. This formed a copy; under thesewere other letters, which Hjalmar had written: they fancied theylooked like the copy, but they were mistaken; for they were leaning onone side as if they intended to fall over the pencil-lines.

"See, this is the way you should hold yourselves," said thecopy. "Look here, you should slope thus, with a graceful curve."

"Oh, we are very willing to do so, but we cannot," saidHjalmar's letters; "we are so wretchedly made."

"You must be scratched out, then," said Ole-Luk-Oie.

"Oh, no!" they cried, and then they stood up so gracefully itwas quite a pleasure to look at them.

"Now we must give up our stories, and exercise these letters,"said Ole-Luk-Oie; "One, two- one, two- " So he drilled them tillthey stood up gracefully, and looked as beautiful as a copy couldlook. But after Ole-Luk-Oie was gone, and Hjalmar looked at them inthe morning, they were as wretched and as awkward as ever.TUESDAY

 TUESDAY

As soon as Hjalmar was in bed, Ole-Luk-Oie touched, with hislittle magic wand, all the furniture in the room, which immediatelybegan to chatter, and each article only talked of itself.

Over the chest of drawers hung a large picture in a gilt frame,representing a landscape, with fine old trees, flowers in the grass,and a broad stream, which flowed through the wood, past severalcastles, far out into the wild ocean. Ole-Luk-Oie touched thepicture with his magic wand, and immediately the birds commencedsinging, the branches of the trees rustled, and the clouds movedacross the sky, casting their shadows on the landscape beneath them.Then Ole-Luk-Oie lifted little Hjalmar up to the frame, and placed hisfeet in the picture, just on the high grass, and there he stood withthe sun shining down upon him through the branches of the trees. Heran to the water, and seated himself in a little boat which lay there,and which was painted red and white. The sails glittered likesilver, and six swans, each with a golden circlet round its neck,and a bright blue star on its forehead, drew the boat past the greenwood, where the trees talked of robbers and witches, and the flowersof beautiful little elves and fairies, whose histories the butterflieshad related to them. Brilliant fish, with scales like silver and gold,swam after the boat, sometimes making a spring and splashing the waterround them, while birds, red and blue, small and great, flew after himin two long lines. The gnats danced round them, and the cockchaferscried "Buz, buz." They all wanted to follow Hjalmar, and all hadsome story to tell him. It was a most pleasant sail. Sometimes theforests were thick and dark, sometimes like a beautiful garden, gaywith sunshine and flowers; then he passed great palaces of glass andof marble, and on the balconies stood princesses, whose faces werethose of little girls whom Hjalmar knew well, and had often playedwith. One of them held out her hand, in which was a heart made ofsugar, more beautiful than any confectioner ever sold. As Hjalmarsailed by, he caught hold of one side of the sugar heart, and heldit fast, and the princess held fast also, so that it broke in twopieces. Hjalmar had one piece, and the princess the other, butHjalmar's was the largest. At each castle stood little princesacting as sentinels. They presented arms, and had golden swords, andmade it rain plums and tin soldiers, so that they must have beenreal princes.

Hjalmar continued to sail, sometimes through woods, sometimes asit were through large halls, and then by large cities. At last he cameto the town where his nurse lived, who had carried him in her armswhen he was a very little boy, and had always been kind to him. Shenodded and beckoned to him, and then sang the little verses she hadherself composed and set to him,-

 "How oft my memory turns to thee,

   My own Hjalmar, ever dear!

 When I could watch thy infant glee,

   Or kiss away a pearly tear.

 'Twas in my arms thy lisping tongue

   First spoke the half-remembered word,

 While o'er thy tottering steps I hung,

   My fond protection to afford.

 Farewell! I pray the Heavenly Power

 To keep thee till thy dying hour."And all the birds sang the same tune, the flowers danced on theirstems, and the old trees nodded as if Ole-Luk-Oie had been tellingthem stories as well.WEDNESDAY

 WEDNESDAY

How the rain did pour down! Hjalmar could hear it in his sleep;.and when Ole-Luk-Oie opened the window, the water flowed quite up tothe window-sill. It had the appearance of a large lake outside, anda beautiful ship lay close to the house.

"Wilt thou sail with me to-night, little Hjalmar?" saidOle-Luk-Oie; "then we shall see foreign countries, and thou shaltreturn here in the morning."

All in a moment, there stood Hjalmar, in his best clothes, onthe deck of the noble ship; and immediately the weather became fine.They sailed through the streets, round by the church, and on everyside rolled the wide, great sea. They sailed till the landdisappeared, and then they saw a flock of storks, who had left theirown country, and were travelling to warmer climates. The storks flewone behind the other, and had already been a long, long time on thewing. One of them seemed so tired that his wings could scarcelycarry him. He was the last of the row, and was soon left very farbehind. At length he sunk lower and lower, with outstretched wings,flapping them in vain, till his feet touched the rigging of theship, and he slided from the sails to the deck, and stood before them.Then a sailor-boy caught him, and put him in the hen-house, with thefowls, the ducks, and the turkeys, while the poor stork stood quitebewildered amongst them.

"Just look at that fellow," said the chickens.

Then the turkey-cock puffed himself out as large as he could,and inquired who he was; and the ducks waddled backwards, crying,"Quack, quack."

Then the stork told them all about warm Africa, of the pyramids,and of the ostrich, which, like a wild horse, runs across thedesert. But the ducks did not understand what he said, and quackedamongst themselves, "We are all of the same opinion; namely, that heis stupid."

"Yes, to be sure, he is stupid," said the turkey-cock; andgobbled.

Then the stork remained quite silent, and thought of his home inAfrica.

"Those are handsome thin legs of yours," said the turkey-cock."What do they cost a yard?"

"Quack, quack, quack," grinned the ducks; but, the stork pretendednot to hear.

"You may as well laugh," said the turkey; "for that remark wasrather witty, or perhaps it was above you. Ah, ah, is he not clever?He will be a great amusement to us while he remains here." And then hegobbled, and the ducks quacked, "Gobble, gobble; Quack, quack."

What a terrible uproar they made, while they were having suchfun among themselves!

Then Hjalmar went to the hen-house; and, opening the door,called to the stork. Then he hopped out on the deck. He had restedhimself now, and he looked happy, and seemed as if he nodded toHjalmar, as if to thank him. Then he spread his wings, and flew awayto warmer countries, while the hens clucked, the ducks quacked, andthe turkey-cock turned quite scarlet in the head.

"To-morrow you shall be made into soup," said Hjalmar to thefowls; and then he awoke, and found himself lying in his little bed.

It was a wonderful journey which Ole-Luk-Oie had made him takethis night.THURSDAY

 THURSDAY

"What do you think I have got here?" said Ole-Luk-Oie, "Do notbe frightened, and you shall see a little mouse." And then he held outhis hand to him, in which lay a lovely little creature. "It has cometo invite you to a wedding. Two little mice are going to enter intothe marriage state tonight. They reside under the floor of yourmother's store-room, and that must be a fine dwelling-place."

"But how can I get through the little mouse-hole in the floor?"asked Hjalmar.

"Leave me to manage that," said Ole-Luk-Oie. "I will soon make yousmall enough." And then he touched Hjalmar with his magic wand,whereupon he became less and less, until at last he was not longerthan a little finger. "Now you can borrow the dress of the tinsoldier. I think it will just fit you. It looks well to wear a uniformwhen you go into company."

"Yes, certainly," said Hjalmar; and in a moment he was dressedas neatly as the neatest of all tin soldiers.

"Will you be so good as to seat yourself in your mamma's thimble,"said the little mouse, "that I may have the pleasure of drawing you tothe wedding."

"Will you really take so much trouble, young lady?" saidHjalmar. And so in this way he rode to the mouse's wedding.

First they went under the floor, and then passed through a longpassage, which was scarcely high enough to allow the thimble todrive under, and the whole passage was lit up with thephosphorescent light of rotten wood.

"Does it not smell delicious?" asked the mouse, as she drew himalong. "The wall and the floor have been smeared with bacon-rind;nothing can be nicer."

Very soon they arrived at the bridal hall. On the right stoodall the little lady-mice, whispering and giggling, as if they weremaking game of each other. To the left were the gentlemen-mice,stroking their whiskers with their fore-paws; and in the centre of thehall could be seen the bridal pair, standing side by side, in a hollowcheese-rind, and kissing each other, while all eyes were upon them;for they had already been betrothed, and were soon to be married. Moreand more friends kept arriving, till the mice were nearly treadingeach other to death; for the bridal pair now stood in the doorway, andnone could pass in or out.

The room had been rubbed over with bacon-rind, like the passage,which was all the refreshment offered to the guests. But for dessertthey produced a pea, on which a mouse belonging to the bridal pair hadbitten the first letters of their names. This was something quiteuncommon. All the mice said it was a very beautiful wedding, andthat they had been very agreeably entertained.

After this, Hjalmar returned home. He had certainly been ingrand society; but he had been obliged to creep under a room, and tomake himself small enough to wear the uniform of a tin soldier.FRIDAY

 FRIDAY

"It is incredible how many old people there are who would beglad to have me at night," said Ole-Luk-Oie, "especially those whohave done something wrong. 'Good little Ole,' say they to me, 'wecannot close our eyes, and we lie awake the whole night and see allour evil deeds sitting on our beds like little imps, and sprinkling uswith hot water. Will you come and drive them away, that we may havea good night's rest?' and then they sigh so deeply and say, 'Wewould gladly pay you for it. Good-night, Ole-Luk, the money lies onthe window.' But I never do anything for gold." "What shall we doto-night?" asked Hjalmar. "I do not know whether you would care togo to another wedding," he replied, "although it is quite adifferent affair to the one we saw last night. Your sister's largedoll, that is dressed like a man, and is called Herman, intends tomarry the doll Bertha. It is also the dolls' birthday, and they willreceive many presents."

"Yes, I know that already," said Hjalmar, "my sister always allowsher dolls to keep their birthdays or to have a wedding when theyrequire new clothes; that has happened already a hundred times, I amquite sure."

"Yes, so it may; but to-night is the hundred and first wedding,and when that has taken place it must be the last, therefore this isto be extremely beautiful. Only look."

Hjalmar looked at the table, and there stood the little card-boarddoll's house, with lights in all the windows, and drawn up before itwere the tin soldiers presenting arms. The bridal pair were seatedon the floor, leaning against the leg of the table, looking verythoughtful, and with good reason. Then Ole-Luk-Oie dressed up ingrandmother's black gown married them.

As soon as the ceremony was concluded, all the furniture in theroom joined in singing a beautiful song, which had been composed bythe lead pencil, and which went to the melody of a military tattoo.

 "What merry sounds are on the wind,

  As marriage rites together bind

  A quiet and a loving pair,

  Though formed of kid, yet smooth and fair!

  Hurrah! If they are deaf and blind,

  We'll sing, though weather prove unkind."

And now came the present; but the bridal pair had nothing toeat, for love was to be their food.

"Shall we go to a country house, or travel?" asked the bridegroom.

Then they consulted the swallow who had travelled so far, andthe old hen in the yard, who had brought up five broods of chickens.

And the swallow talked to them of warm countries, where the grapeshang in large clusters on the vines, and the air is soft and mild, andabout the mountains glowing with colors more beautiful than we canthink of.

"But they have no red cabbage like we have," said the hen, "Iwas once in the country with my chickens for a whole summer, there wasa large sand-pit, in which we could walk about and scratch as weliked. Then we got into a garden in which grew red cabbage; oh, hownice it was, I cannot think of anything more delicious."

"But one cabbage stalk is exactly like another," said the swallow;"and here we have often bad weather."

"Yes, but we are accustomed to it," said the hen.

"But it is so cold here, and freezes sometimes."

"Cold weather is good for cabbages," said the hen; "besides wedo have it warm here sometimes. Four years ago, we had a summer thatlasted more than five weeks, and it was so hot one could scarcelybreathe. And then in this country we have no poisonous animals, and weare free from robbers. He must be wicked who does not consider ourcountry the finest of all lands. He ought not to be allowed to livehere." And then the hen wept very much and said, "I have alsotravelled. I once went twelve miles in a coop, and it was not pleasanttravelling at all."

"The hen is a sensible woman," said the doll Bertha. "I don't carefor travelling over mountains, just to go up and come down again.No, let us go to the sand-pit in front of the gate, and then take awalk in the cabbage garden."

And so they settled it.SATURDAY

 SATURDAY

"Am I to hear any more stories?" asked little Hjalmar, as soonas Ole-Luk-Oie had sent him to sleep.

"We shall have no time this evening," said he, spreading out hisprettiest umbrella over the child. "Look at these Chinese," and thenthe whole umbrella appeared like a large china bowl, with blue treesand pointed bridges, upon which stood little Chinamen nodding theirheads. "We must make all the world beautiful for to-morrow morning,"said Ole-Luk-Oie, "for it will be a holiday, it is Sunday. I mustnow go to the church steeple and see if the little sprites who livethere have polished the bells, so that they may sound sweetly. ThenI must go into the fields and see if the wind has blown the dustfrom the grass and the leaves, and the most difficult task of allwhich I have to do, is to take down all the stars and brighten themup. I have to number them first before I put them in my apron, andalso to number the places from which I take them, so that they maygo back into the right holes, or else they would not remain, and weshould have a number of falling stars, for they would all tumbledown one after the other."

"Hark ye! Mr. Luk-Oie," said an old portrait which hung on thewall of Hjalmar's bedroom. "Do you know me? I am Hjalmar'sgreat-grandfather. I thank you for telling the boy stories, but youmust not confuse his ideas. The stars cannot be taken down from thesky and polished; they are spheres like our earth, which is a goodthing for them."

"Thank you, old great-grandfather," said Ole-Luk-Oie. "I thankyou; you may be the head of the family, as no doubt you are, but Iam older than you. I am an ancient heathen. The old Romans andGreeks named me the Dream-god. I have visited the noblest houses,and continue to do so; still I know how to conduct myself both to highand low, and now you may tell the stories yourself:" and soOle-Luk-Oie walked off, taking his umbrellas with him.

"Well, well, one is never to give an opinion, I suppose," grumbledthe portrait. And it woke Hjalmar.SUNDAY

 SUNDAY

"Good evening," said Ole-Luk-Oie.

Hjalmar nodded, and then sprang out of bed, and turned hisgreat-grandfather's portrait to the wall, so that it might notinterrupt them as it had done yesterday. "Now," said he, "you musttell me some stories about five green peas that lived in one pod; orof the chickseed that courted the chickweed; or of the darning needle,who acted so proudly because she fancied herself an embroideryneedle."

"You may have too much of a good thing," said Ole-Luk-Oie. "Youknow that I like best to show you something, so I will show you mybrother. He is also called Ole-Luk-Oie but he never visits any one butonce, and when he does come, he takes him away on his horse, and tellshim stories as they ride along. He knows only two stories. One ofthese is so wonderfully beautiful, that no one in the world canimagine anything at all like it; but the other is just as ugly andfrightful, so that it would be impossible to describe it." ThenOle-Luk-Oie lifted Hjalmar up to the window. "There now, you can seemy brother, the other Ole-Luk-Oie; he is also called Death. Youperceive he is not so bad as they represent him in picture books;there he is a skeleton, but now his coat is embroidered with silver,and he wears the splendid uniform of a hussar, and a mantle of blackvelvet flies behind him, over the horse. Look, how he gallopsalong." Hjalmar saw that as this Ole-Luk-Oie rode on, he lifted up oldand young, and carried them away on his horse. Some he seated in frontof him, and some behind, but always inquired first, "How stands themark-book?"

"Good," they all answered.

"Yes, but let me see for myself," he replied; and they wereobliged to give him the books. Then all those who had "Very good,"or "Exceedingly good," came in front of the horse, and heard thebeautiful story; while those who had "Middling," or "Tolerablygood," in their books, were obliged to sit behind, and listen to thefrightful tale. They trembled and cried, and wanted to jump downfrom the horse, but they could not get free, for they seemedfastened to the seat.

"Why, Death is a most splendid Luk-Oie," said Hjalmar. "I am notin the least afraid of him."

"You need have no fear of him," said Ole-Luk-Oie, "if you takecare and keep a good conduct book."

"Now I call that very instructive," murmured thegreat-grandfather's portrait. "It is useful sometimes to express anopinion;" so he was quite satisfied.

These are some of the doings and sayings of Ole-Luk-Oie. I hope hemay visit you himself this evening, and relate some more.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

OUR AUNT

   by Hans Christian Andersen

You ought to have known our aunt; she was charming! That is tosay, she was not charming at all as the word is usually understood;but she was good and kind, amusing in her way, and was just as any oneought to be whom people are to talk about and to laugh at. She mighthave been put into a play, and wholly and solely on account of thefact that she only lived for the theatre and for what was donethere. She was an honorable matron; but Agent Fabs, whom she used tocall "Flabs," declared that our aunt was stage-struck.

"The theatre is my school," said she, "the source of my knowledge.From thence I have resuscitated Biblical history. Now, 'Moses' and'Joseph in Egypt'- there are operas for you! I get my universalhistory from the theatre, my geography, and my knowledge of men. Outof the French pieces I get to know life in Paris- slippery, butexceedingly interesting. How I have cried over "La FamilleRoquebourg'- that the man must drink himself to death, so that she maymarry the young fellow! Yes, how many tears I have wept in the fiftyyears I have subscribed to the theatre!"

Our aunt knew every acting play, every bit of scenery, everycharacter, every one who appeared or had appeared. She seemed reallyonly to live during the nine months the theatre was open. Summertimewithout a summer theatre seemed to be only a time that made her old;while, on the other hand, a theatrical evening that lasted tillmidnight was a lengthening of her life. She did not say, as otherpeople do, "Now we shall have spring, the stork is here," or, "They'veadvertised the first strawberries in the papers." She, on thecontrary, used to announce the coming of autumn, with "Have youheard they're selling boxes for the theatre? now the performances willbegin."

She used to value a lodging entirely according to its proximity tothe theatre. It was a real sorrow to her when she had to leave thelittle lane behind the playhouse, and move into the great streetthat lay a little farther off, and live there in a house where she hadno opposite neighbors.

"At home," said she, "my windows must be my opera-box. Onecannot sit and look into one's self till one's tired; one must seepeople. But now I live just as if I'd go into the country. If I wantto see human beings, I must go into my kitchen, and sit down on thesink, for there only I have opposite neighbors. No; when I lived in mydear little lane, I could look straight down into the ironmonger'sshop, and had only three hundred paces to the theatre; and now I'vethree thousand paces to go, military measurement."

Our aunt was sometimes ill, but however unwell she might feel, shenever missed the play. The doctor prescribed one day that she shouldput her feet in a bran bath, and she followed his advice; but shedrove to the theatre all the same, and sat with her feet in branthere. If she had died there, she would have been very glad.Thorwaldsen died in the theatre, and she called that a happy death.

She could not imagine but that in heaven there must be a theatretoo. It had not, indeed, been promised us, but we might very wellimagine it. The many distinguished actors and actresses who had passedaway must surely have a field for their talent.

Our aunt had an electric wire from the theatre to her room. Atelegram used to be dispatched to her at coffee-time, and it used toconsist of the words, "Herr Sivertsen is at the machinery;" for it washe who gave the signal for drawing the curtain up and down and forchanging the scenes.

From him she used to receive a short and concise description ofevery piece. His opinion of Shakspeare's "Tempest," was, "Madnonsense! There's so much to put up, and the first scene begins with'Water to the front of the wings.'" That is to say, the water had tocome forward so far. But when, on the other hand, the same interiorscene remained through five acts, he used to pronounce it asensible, well-written play, a resting play, which performed itself,without putting up scenes.

In earlier times, by which name our aunt used to designatethirty years ago, she and the before-mentioned Herr Sivertsen had beenyounger. At that time he had already been connected with themachinery, and was, as she said, her benefactor. It used to be thecustom in those days that in the evening performances in the onlytheatre the town possessed, spectators were admitted to the partcalled the "flies," over the stage, and every machinist had one or twoplaces to give away. Often the flies were quite full of goodcompany; it was said that generals' wives and privy councillors' wiveshad been up there. It was quite interesting to look down behind thescenes, and to see how the people walked to and fro on the stagewhen the curtain was down.

Our aunt had been there several times, as well when there was atragedy as when there was a ballet; for the pieces in which there werethe greatest number of characters on the stage were the mostinteresting to see from the flies. One sat pretty much in the darkup there, and most people took their supper up with them. Once threeapples and a great piece of bread and butter and sausage fell downright into the dungeon of Ugolino, where that unhappy man was to bestarved to death; and there was great laughter among the audience. Thesausage was one of the weightiest reasons why the worthy managementrefused in future to have any spectators up in the flies.

"But I was there seven-and-thirty times," said our aunt, "and Ishall always remember Mr. Sivertsen for that."

On the very last evening when the flies were still open to thepublic, the "Judgment of Solomon" was performed, as our auntremembered very well. She had, through the influence of herbenefactor, Herr Sivertsen, procured a free admission for the AgentFabs, although he did not deserve it in the least, for he was alwayscutting his jokes about the theatre and teasing our aunt; but shehad procured him a free admission to the flies, for all that. Hewanted to look at this player-stuff from the other side.

"Those were his own words, and they were just like him," saidour aunt.

He looked down from above on the 'Judgment of Solomon," and fellasleep over it. One would have thought that he had come from adinner where many toasts had been given. He went to sleep, and waslocked in. And there he sat through the dark night in the flies, andwhen he woke, he told a story, but our aunt would not believe it.

"The 'Judgment of Solomon' was over," he said, "and all the peoplehad gone away, up stairs and down stairs; but now the real play began,the after-piece, which was the best of all," said the agent. "Thenlife came into the affair. It was not the 'Judgment of Solomon' thatwas performed; no, a real court of judgment was held upon thestage." And Agent Fabs had the impudence to try and make our auntbelieve all this. That was the thanks she got for having got him aplace in the flies.

What did the agent say? Why, it was curious enough to hear, butthere was malice and satire in it.

"It looked dark enough up there," said the agent; "but then themagic business began- a great performance, 'The Judgment in theTheatre.' The box-keepers were at their posts, and every spectator hadto show his ghostly pass-book, that it might be decided if he was tobe admitted with hands loose or bound, and with or without a muzzle.Grand people who came too late, when the performance had begun, andyoung people, who could not always watch the time, were tied upoutside, and had list slippers put on their feet, with which they wereallowed to go in before the beginning of the next act, and they hadmuzzles too. And then the 'Judgment on the Stage' began."

"All malice, and not a bit of truth in it," said our aunt.

The painter, who wanted to get to Paradise, had to go up astaircase which he had himself painted, but which no man couldmount. That was to expiate his sins against perspective. All theplants and buildings, which the property-man had placed, with infinitepains, in countries to which they did not belong, the poor fellowwas obliged to put in their right places before cockcrow, if he wantedto get into Paradise. Let Herr Fabs see how he would get in himself;but what he said of the performers, tragedians and comedians,singers and dancers, that was the most rascally of all. Mr. Fabs,indeed!- Flabs! He did not deserve to be admitted at all, and our auntwould not soil her lips with what he said. And he said, did Flabs,that the whole was written down, and it should be printed when hewas dead and buried, but not before, for he would not risk havinghis arms and legs broken.

Once our aunt had been in fear and trembling in her temple ofhappiness, the theatre. It was on a winter day, one of those days inwhich one has a couple of hours of daylight, with a gray sky. It wasterribly cold and snowy, but aunt must go to the theatre. A littleopera and a great ballet were performed, and a prologue and anepilogue into the bargain; and that would last till late at night. Ouraunt must needs go; so she borrowed a pair of fur boots of her lodger-boots with fur inside and out, and which reached far up her legs.

She got to the theatre, and to her box; the boots were warm, andshe kept them on. Suddenly there was a cry of "Fire!" Smoke was comingfrom one of the side scenes, and streamed down from the flies, andthere was a terrible panic. The people came rushing out, and ouraunt was the last in the box, "on the second tier, left-hand side, forfrom there the scenery looks best," she used to say. "The scenes arealways arranged that they look best from the King's side." Aunt wantedto come out, but the people before her, in their fright andheedlessness, slammed the door of the box; and there sat our aunt, andcouldn't get out, and couldn't get in; that is to say, she couldn'tget into the next box, for the partition was too high for her. Shecalled out, and no one heard her; she looked down into the tier ofboxes below her, and it was empty, and low, and looked quite near, andaunt in her terror felt quite young and light. She thought ofjumping down, and had got one leg over the partition, the otherresting on the bench. There she sat astride, as if on horseback,well wrapped up in her flowered cloak with one leg hanging out- aleg in a tremendous fur boot. That was a sight to behold; and whenit was beheld, our aunt was heard too, and was saved from burning, forthe theatre was not burned down.

That was the most memorable evening of her life, and she wasglad that she could not see herself, for she would have died withconfusion.

Her benefactor in the machinery department, Herr Sivertsen,visited her every Sunday, but it was a long time from Sunday toSunday. In the latter time, therefore, she used to have in a littlechild "for the scraps;" that is to say, to eat up the remains of thedinner. It was a child employed in the ballet, one that certainlywanted feeding. The little one used to appear, sometimes as an elf,sometimes as a page; the most difficult part she had to play was thelion's hind leg in the "Magic Flute;" but as she grew larger she couldrepresent the fore-feet of the lion. She certainly only got half aguilder for that, whereas the hind legs were paid for with a wholeguilder; but then she had to walk bent, and to do without fresh air."That was all very interesting to hear," said our aunt.

She deserved to live as long as the theatre stood, but she couldnot last so long; and she did not die in the theatre, butrespectably in her bed. Her last words were, moreover, not withoutmeaning. She asked,

"What will the play be to-morrow?"

At her death she left about five hundred dollars. We presumethis from the interest, which came to twenty dollars. This our aunthad destined as a legacy for a worthy old spinster who had no friends;it was to be devoted to a yearly subscription for a place in thesecond tier, on the left side, for the Saturday evening, "for onthat evening two pieces were always given," it said in the will; andthe only condition laid upon the person who enjoyed the legacy was,that she should think, every Saturday evening, of our aunt, who waslying in her grave.

This was our aunt's religion.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

  POULTRY MEG'S FAMILY

   by Hans Christian Andersen

POULTRY MEG was the only person who lived in the new statelydwelling that had been built for the fowls and ducks belonging tothe manor house. It stood there where once the old knightly buildinghad stood with its tower, its pointed gables, its moat, and itsdrawbridge. Close by it was a wilderness of trees and thicket; herethe garden had been, and had stretched out to a great lake, whichwas now moorland. Crows and choughs flew screaming over the old trees,and there were crowds of birds; they did not seem to get fewer whenany one shot among them, but seemed rather to increase. One heardthe screaming into the poultry-house, where Poultry Meg sat with theducklings running to and fro over her wooden shoes. She knew everyfowl and every duck from the moment it crept out of the shell; and shewas fond of her fowls and her ducks, and proud of the stately housethat had been built for them. Her own little room in the house wasclean and neat, for that was the wish of the gracious lady to whom thehouse belonged. She often came in the company of grand noble guests,to whom she showed "the hens' and ducks' barracks," as she calledthe little house.

Here were a clothes cupboard, and an, arm-chair, and even achest of drawers; and on these drawers a polished metal plate had beenplaced, whereon was engraved the word "Grubbe," and this was thename of the noble family that had lived in the house of old. The brassplate had been found when they were digging the foundation; and theclerk has said it had no value except in being an old relic. The clerkknew all about the place, and about the old times, for he had hisknowledge from books, and many a memorandum had been written and putin his table-drawer. But the oldest of the crows perhaps knew morethan he, and screamed it out in her own language; but that was thecrow's language, and the clerk did not understand that, clever as hewas.

After the hot summer days the mist sometimes hung over themoorland as if a whole lake were behind the old trees, among which thecrows and the daws were fluttering; and thus it had looked when thegood Knight Grubbe had lived here- when the old manor house stood withits thick red walls. The dog-chain used to reach in those days quiteover the gateway; through the tower one went into a paved passagewhich led to the rooms; the windows were narrow, and the panes weresmall, even in the great hall where the dancing used to be; but in thetime of the last Grubbe, there had been no dancing in the hallwithin the memory of man, although an old drum still lay there thathad served as part of the music. Here stood a quaintly carvedcupboard, in which rare flower-roots were kept, for my Lady Grubbe wasfond of plants and cultivated trees and shrubs. Her husbandpreferred riding out to shoot wolves and boars; and his littledaughter Marie always went with him part of the way. When she was onlyfive years old, she would sit proudly on her horse, and look saucilyround with her great black eyes. It was a great amusement to her tohit out among the hunting-dogs with her whip; but her father wouldrather have seen her hit among the peasant boys, who came running upto stare at their lord.

The peasant in the clay hut close by the knightly house had ason named Soren, of the same age as the gracious little lady. Theboy could climb well, and had always to bring her down the bird'snests. The birds screamed as loud as they could, and one of thegreatest of them hacked him with its beak over the eye so that theblood ran down, and it was at first thought the eye had beendestroyed; but it had not been injured after all. Marie Grubbe used tocall him her Soren, and that was a great favor, and was an advantageto Soren's father- poor Jon, who had one day committed a fault, andwas to be punished by riding on the wooden horse. This same horsestood in the courtyard, and had four poles for legs, and a singlenarrow plant for a back; on this Jon had to ride astride, and someheavy bricks were fastened to his feet into the bargain, that he mightnot sit too comfortably. He made horrible grimaces, and Soren wept andimplored little Marie to interfere. She immediately ordered thatSoren's father should be taken down, and when they did not obey her,she stamped on the floor, and pulled at her father's sleeve till itwas torn to pieces. She would have her way, and she got her way, andSoren's father was taken down.

Lady Grubbe, who now came up, parted her little daughter's hairfrom the child's brow, and looked at her affectionately; but Marie didnot understand why.

She wanted to go to the hounds, and not to her mother, who wentdown into the garden, to the lake where the water-lily bloomed, andthe heads of bulrushes nodded amid the reeds; and she looked at allthis beauty and freshness. "How pleasant!" she said. In the gardenstood at that time a rare tree, which she herself had planted. Itwas called the blood-beech- a kind of negro growing among the othertrees, so dark brown were the leaves. This tree required muchsunshine, for in continual shade it would become bright green like theother trees, and thus lose its distinctive character. In the loftychestnut trees were many birds' nests, and also in the thickets and inthe grassy meadows. It seemed as though the birds knew that theywere protected here, and that no one must fire a gun at them.

Little Marie came here with Soren. He knew how to climb, as wehave already said, and eggs and fluffy-feathered young birds werebrought down. The birds, great and small, flew about in terror andtribulation; the peewit from the fields, and the crows and daws fromthe high trees, screamed and screamed; it was just such din as thefamily will raise to the present day.

"What are you doing, you children?" cried the gentle lady; "thatis sinful!"

Soren stood abashed, and even the little gracious lady looked downa little; but then he said, quite short and pretty,

"My father lets me do it!"

"Craw-craw! away-away from here!" cried the great black birds, andthey flew away; but on the following day they came back, for they wereat home here.

The quiet gentle lady did not remain long at home here on earth,for the good God called her away; and, indeed, her home was ratherwith Him than in the knightly house; and the church bells tolledsolemnly when her corpse was carried to the church, and the eyes ofthe poor people were wet with tears, for she had been good to them.

When she was gone, no one attended to her plantations, and thegarden ran to waste. Grubbe the knight was a hard man, they said;but his daughter, young as she was, knew how to manage him. He used tolaugh and let her have her way. She was now twelve years old, andstrongly built. She looked the people through and through with herblack eyes, rode her horse as bravely as a man, and could fire off hergun like a practiced hunter.

One day there were great visitors in the neighborhood, thegrandest visitors who could come. The young King, and his half-brotherand comrade, the Lord Ulric Frederick Gyldenlowe. They wanted tohunt the wild boar, and to pass a few days at the castle of Grubbe.

Gyldenlowe sat at table next to Marie Grubbe, and he took her bythe hand and gave her a kiss, as if she had been a relation; but shegave him a box on the ear, and told him she could not bear him, atwhich there was great laughter, as if that had been a very amusingthing.

And perhaps it was very amusing, for, five years afterwards,when Marie had fulfilled her seventeenth year, a messenger arrivedwith a letter, in which Lord Gyldenlowe proposed for the hand of thenoble young lady. There was a thing for you!

"He is the grandest and most gallant gentleman in the wholecountry," said Grubbe the knight; "that is not a thing to despise."

"I don't care so very much about him," said Marie Grubbe; butshe did not despise the grandest man of all the country, who sat bythe king's side.

Silver plate, and fine linen and woollen, went off to Copenhagenin a ship, while the bride made the journey by land in ten days. Butthe outfit met with contrary winds, or with no winds at all, forfour months passed before it arrived; and when it came, my LadyGyldenlowe was gone.

"I'd rather lie on coarse sacking than lie in his silken beds,"she declared. "I'd rather walk barefoot than drive with him in acoach!"

Late one evening in November two women came riding into the townof Aarhuus. They were the gracious Lady Gyldenlowe (Marie Grubbe)and her maid. They came from the town of Weile, whither they hadcome in a ship from Copenhagen. They stopped at Lord Grubbe's stonemansion in Aarhuus. Grubbe was not well pleased with this visit. Mariewas accosted in hard words; but she had a bedroom given her, and gother beer soup of a morning; but the evil part of her father's naturewas aroused against her, and she was not used to that. She was notof a gentle temper, and we often answer as we are addressed. Sheanswered openly, and spoke with bitterness and hatred of herhusband, with whom she declared she would not live; she was toohonorable for that.

A year went by, but it did not go by pleasantly. There were evilwords between the father and the daughter, and that ought never to be.Bad words bear bad fruit. What could be the end of such a state ofthings?

"We two cannot live under the same roof," said the father one day."Go away from here to our old manor house; but you had better biteyour tongue off than spread any lies among the people."

And so the two parted. She went with her maid to the old castlewhere she had been born, and near which the gentle, pious lady, hermother, was lying in the church vault. An old cowherd lived in thecourtyard, and was the only other inhabitant of the place. In therooms heavy black cobwebs hung down, covered with dust; in thegarden everything grew just as it would; hops and climbing plantsran like a net between the trees and bushes, and the hemlock andnettle grew larger and stronger. The blood-beech had been outgrownby other trees, and now stood in the shade; and its leaves weregreen like those of the common trees, and its glory had departed.Crows and choughs, in great close masses, flew past over the tallchestnut trees, and chattered and screamed as if they had somethingvery important to tell one another- as if they were saying, "Now she'scome back again, the little girl who had their eggs and their youngones stolen from them; and as for the thief who had got them down,he had to climb up a leafless tree, for he sat on a tall ship'smast, and was beaten with a rope's end if he did not behave himself."

The clerk told all this in our own times; he had collected itand looked it up in books and memoranda. It was to be found, with manyother writings, locked up in his table-drawer.

"Upward and downward is the course of the world," said he. "Itis strange to hear.

And we will hear how it went with Marie Grubbe. We need not forthat forget Poultry Meg, who is sitting in her capital hen-house, inour own time. Marie Grubbe sat down in her times, but not with thesame spirit that old Poultry Meg showed.

The winter passed away, and the spring and the summer passed away,and the autumn came again, with the damp, cold sea-fog. It was alonely, desolate life in the old manor house. Marie Grubbe took hergun in her hand and went out to the heath, and shot hares and foxes,and whatever birds she could hit. More than once she met the noble SirPalle Dyre, of Norrebak, who was also wandering about with his gun andhis dogs. He was tall and strong, and boasted of this when they talkedtogether. He could have measured himself against the deceased Mr.Brockenhuus, of Egeskov, of whom the people still talked. Palle Dyrehad, after the example of Brockenhuus, caused an iron chain with ahunting-horn to be hung in his gateway; and when he came ridinghome, he used to seize the chain, and lift himself and his horsefrom the ground, and blow the horn.

"Come yourself, and see me do that, Dame Marie," he said. 'One canbreathe fresh and free at Norrebak.

When she went to his castle is not known, but on the altarcandlestick in the church of Norrebak it was inscribed that theywere the gift of Palle Dyre and Marie Grubbe, of Norrebak Castle.

A great stout man was Palle Dyre. He drank like a sponge. He waslike a tub that could never get full; he snored like a whole sty ofpigs, and he looked red and bloated.

"He is treacherous and malicious," said Dame Pally Dyre,Grubbe's daughter. Soon she was weary of her life with him, but thatdid not make it better.

One day the table was spread, and the dishes grew cold. Palle Dyrewas out hunting foxes, and the gracious lady was nowhere to befound. Towards midnight Palle Dyre came home, but Dame Dyre cameneither at midnight, nor next morning. She had turned her back uponNorrebak, and had ridden away without saying good-bye.

It was gray, wet weather; the wind grew cold, and a flight ofblack screaming birds flew over her head. They were not so homeless asshe.

First she journeyed southward, quite down into the German land.A couple of golden rings with costly stones were turned into money;and then she turned to the east, and then she turned again and wenttowards the west. She had no food before her eyes, and murmuredagainst everything, even against the good God himself, so wretched washer soul. Soon her body became wretched too, and she was scarcely ableto move a foot. The peewit flew up as she stumbled over the mound ofearth where it had built its nest. The bird cried, as it always cried,"You thief! you thief!" She had never stolen her neighbor's goods; butas a little girl she had caused eggs and young birds to be takenfrom the trees, and she thought of that now.

From where she lay she could see the sand-dunes. By the seashorelived fishermen; but she could not get so far, she was so ill. Thegreat white sea-mews flew over her head, and screamed as the crows anddaws screamed at home in the garden of the manor house. The birds flewquite close to her, and at last it seemed to her as if they becameblack as crows, and then all was night before her eyes.

When she opened her eyes again, she was being lifted andcarried. A great strong man had taken her up in his arms, and shewas looking straight into his bearded face. He had a scar over oneeye, which seemed to divide the eyebrow into two parts. Weak as shewas, he carried her to the ship, where he got a rating for it from thecaptain.

The next day the ship sailed away. Madame Grubbe had not beenput ashore, so she sailed away with it. But she will return, willshe not? Yes, but where, and when?

The clerk could tell about this too, and it was not a storywhich he patched together himself. He had the whole strange historyout of an old authentic book, which we ourselves can take out andread. The Danish historian, Ludwig Holberg, who has written so manyuseful books and merry comedies, from which we can get such a goodidea of his times and their people, tells in his letters of MarieGrubbe, where and how he met her. It is well worth hearing; but forall that, we don't at all forget Poultry Meg, who is sittingcheerful and comfortable in the charming fowl-house.

The ship sailed away with Marie Grubbe. That's where we left off.

Long years went by.

The plague was raging at Copenhagen; it was in the year 1711.The Queen of Denmark went away to her German home, the King quittedthe capital, and everybody who could do so hurried away. The students,even those who had board and lodging gratis, left the city. One ofthese students, the last who had remained in the free college, at lastwent away too. It was two o'clock in the morning. He was carryinghis knapsack, which was better stacked with books and writings thanwith clothes. A damp mist hung over the town; not a person was to beseen in the streets; the street-doors around were marked with crosses,as a sign that the plague was within, or that all the inmates weredead. A great wagon rattled past him; the coachman brandished hiswhip, and the horses flew by at a gallop. The wagon was filled withcorpses. The young student kept his hand before his face, and smelt atsome strong spirits that he had with him on a sponge in a little brassscent-case. Out of a small tavern in one of the streets there weresounds of singing and of unhallowed laughter, from people who drankthe night through to forget that the plague was at their doors, andthat they might be put into the wagon as the others had been. Thestudent turned his steps towards the canal at the castle bridge, wherea couple of small ships were lying; one of these was weighinganchor, to get away from the plague-stricken city.

"If God spares our lives and grants us a fair wind, we are goingto Gronmud, near Falster," said the captain; and he asked the nameof the student who wished to go with him.

"Ludwig Holberg," answered the student; and the name soundedlike any other. But now there sounds in it one of the proudest namesof Denmark; then it was the name of a young, unknown student.

The ship glided past the castle. It was not yet bright day when itwas in the open sea. A light wind filled the sails, and the youngstudent sat down with his face turned towards the fresh wind, and wentto sleep, which was not exactly the most prudent thing he could havedone.

Already on the third day the ship lay by the island of Falster.

"Do you know any one here with whom I could lodge cheaply?"Holberg asked the captain.

"I should think you would do well to go to the ferry-woman inBorrehaus," answered the captain. "If you want to be very civil toher, her name is Mother Soren Sorensen Muller. But it may happenthat she may fly into a fury if you are too polite to her. The manis in custody for a crime, and that's why she manages the ferry-boatherself- she has fists of her own."

The student took his knapsack and betook himself to theferry-house. The house door was not locked- it opened, and he wentinto a room with a brick floor, where a bench, with a great coverletof leather, formed the chief article of furniture. A white hen, whohad a brood of chickens, was fastened to the bench, and had overturnedthe pipkin of water, so that the wet ran across the floor. Therewere no people either here or in the adjoining room; only a cradlestood there, in which was a child. The ferry-boat came back withonly one person in it. Whether that person was a man or a woman wasnot an easy matter to determine. The person in question was wrapped ina great cloak, and wore a kind of hood. Presently the boat lay to.

It was a woman who got out of it and came into the room. Shelooked very stately when she straightened her back; two proud eyeslooked forth from beneath her black eyebrows. It was Mother Soren, theferry-wife. The crows and daws might have called out another namefor her, which we know better.

She looked morose, and did not seem to care to talk; but this muchwas settled, that the student should board in her house for anindefinite time, while things looked so bad in Copenhagen.

This or that honest citizen would often come to the ferry-housefrom the neighboring little town. There came Frank the cutler, andSivert the exciseman. They drank a mug of beer in the ferry-house, andused to converse with the student, for he was a clever young man,who knew his "Practica," as they called it; he could read Greek andLatin, and was well up in learned subjects.

"The less one knows, the less it presses upon one," said MotherSoren.

"You have to work hard," said Holberg one day, when she wasdipping clothes in the strong soapy water, and was obliged herselfto split the logs for the fire.

"That's my affair," she replied.

"Have you been obliged to toil in this way from your childhood?"

"You can read that from my hands," she replied, and held out herhands, that were small indeed, but hard and strong, with bitten nails."You are learned, and can read."

At Christmas-time it began to snow heavily. The cold came on,the wind blue sharp, as if there were vitriol in it to wash thepeople's faces. Mother Soren did not let that disturb her; she threwher cloak around her, and drew her hood over her head. Early in theafternoon- it was already dark in the house- she laid wood and turf onthe hearth, and then she sat down to darn her stockings, for there wasno one to do it for her. Towards evening she spoke more words to thestudent than it was customary with her to use; she spoke of herhusband.

"He killed a sailor of Dragor by mischance, and for that he has towork for three years in irons. He's only a common sailor, andtherefore the law must take its course."

"The law is there for people of high rank, too," said Holberg.

"Do you think so?" said Mother Soren; then she looked into thefire for a while; but after a time she began to speak again. "Have youheard of Kai Lykke, who caused a church to be pulled down, and whenthe clergyman, Master Martin, thundered from the pulpit about it, hehad him put in irons, and sat in judgment upon him, and condemnedhim to death? Yes, and the clergyman was obliged to bow his head tothe stroke. And yet Kai Lykke went scot-free."

"He had a right to do as he did in those times," said Holberg;"but now we have left those times behind us."

"You may get a fool to believe that," cried Mother Soren; andshe got up and went into the room where the child lay. She lifted upthe child, and laid it down more comfortably. Then she arranged thebed-place of the student. He had the green coverlet, for he felt thecold more than she, though he was born in Norway.

On New Year's morning it was a bright sunshiny day. The frosthad been so strong, and was still so strong, that the fallen snowhad become a hard mass, and one could walk upon it. The bells of thelittle town were tolling for church. Student Holberg wrapped himselfup in his woollen cloak, and wanted to go to the town.

Over the ferry-house the crows and daws were flying with loudcries; one could hardly hear the church bells for their screaming.Mother Soren stood in front of the house, filling a brass pot withsnow, which she was going to put on the fire to get drinking water.She looked up to the crowd of birds, and thought her own thoughts.

Student Holberg went to church. On his way there and on his returnhe passed by the house of tax-collector Sivert, by the town-gate. Herehe was invited to take a mug of brown beer with treacle and sugar. Thediscourse fell upon Mother Soren, but the tax collector did not knowmuch about her, and, indeed, few knew much about her. She did notbelong to the island of Falster, he said; she had a little property ofher own at one time. Her husband was a common sailor, a fellow of avery hot temper, and had killed a sailor of Dragor; and he beat hiswife, and yet she defended him.

"I should not endure such treatment," said the tax-collector'swife. "I am come of more respectable people. My father wasstocking-weaver to the Court."

"And consequently you have married a governmental official,"said Holberg, and made a bow to her and to the collector.

It was on Twelfth Night, the evening of the festival of theThree Kings, Mother Soren lit up for Holberg a three-king candle, thatis, a tallow candle with three wicks, which she had herself prepared.

"A light for each man," said Holberg.

"For each man?" repeated the woman, looking sharply at him.

"For each of the wise men from the East," said Holberg.

"You mean it that way," said she, and then she was silent for along time. But on this evening he learned more about her than he hadyet known.

"You speak very affectionately of your husband," observed Holberg,"and yet the people say that he ill-uses you every day."

"That's no one's business but mine," she replied. "The blows mighthave done me good when I was a child; now, I suppose, I get them formy sins. But I know what good he has done me," and she rose up."When I lay sick upon the desolate heath, and no one would have pityon me, and no one would have anything to do with me, except thecrows and daws, which came to peck me to bits, he carried me in hisarms, and had to bear hard words because of the burden he brought onboard ship. It's not in my nature to be sick, and so I got well. Everyman has his own way, and Soren has his; but the horse must not bejudged by the halter. Taking one thing with another, I have lived moreagreeably with him than with the man whom they called the most nobleand gallant of the King's subjects. I have had the StadtholderGyldenlowe, the King's half-brother, for my husband; and afterwardsI took Palle Dyre. One is as good as another, each in his own way, andI in mine. That was a long gossip, but now you know all about me."

And with those words she left the room.

It was Marie Grubbe! so strangely had fate played with her. Shedid not live to see many anniversaries of the festival of the ThreeKings; Holberg has recorded that she died in June, 1716; but he hasnot written down, for he did not know, that a number of great blackbirds circled over the ferry-house, when Mother Soren, as she wascalled, was lying there a corpse. They did not scream, as if they knewthat at a burial silence should be observed. So soon as she lay in theearth, the birds disappeared; but on the same evening in Jutland, atthe old manor house, an enormous number of crows and choughs wereseen; they all cried as loud as they could, as if they had someannouncement to make. Perhaps they talked of him who, as a little boy,had taken away their eggs and their young; of the peasant's son, whohad to wear an iron garter, and of the noble young lady, who endedby being a ferryman's wife.

"Brave! brave!" they cried.

And the whole family cried, "Brave! brave!" when the old house waspulled down.

"They are still crying, and yet there's nothing to cry about,"said the clerk, when he told the story. "The family is extinct, thehouse has been pulled down, and where it stood is now the statelypoultry-house, with gilded weathercocks, and the old Poultry Meg.She rejoices greatly in her beautiful dwelling. If she had not comehere," the old clerk added, "she would have had to go into thework-house."

The pigeons cooed over her, the turkey-cocks gobbled, and theducks quacked.

"Nobody knew her," they said; "she belongs to no family. It's purecharity that she is here at all. She has neither a drake father nora hen mother, and has no descendants."

She came of a great family, for all that; but she did not know it,and the old clerk did not know it, though he had so much written down;but one of the old crows knew about it, and told about it. She hadheard from her own mother and grandmother about Poultry Meg's motherand grandmother. And we know the grandmother too. We saw her ride,as child, over the bridge, looking proudly around her, as if the wholeworld belonged to her, and all the birds' nests in it; and we sawher on the heath, by the sand-dunes; and, last of all, in theferry-house. The granddaughter, the last of her race, had come back tothe old home, where the old castle had stood, where the black wildbirds were screaming; but she sat among the tame birds, and these knewher and were fond of her. Poultry Meg had nothing left to wish for;she looked forward with pleasure to her death, and she was oldenough to die.

"Grave, grave!" cried the crows.

And Poultry Meg has a good grave, which nobody knew except the oldcrow, if the old crow is not dead already.

And now we know the story of the old manor house, of its oldproprietors, and of all Poultry Meg's family.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

SHE WAS GOOD FOR NOTHING

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THE mayor stood at the open window. He looked smart, for hisshirt-frill, in which he had stuck a breast-pin, and his ruffles, werevery fine. He had shaved his chin uncommonly smooth, although he hadcut himself slightly, and had stuck a piece of newspaper over theplace. "Hark 'ee, youngster!" cried he.

The boy to whom he spoke was no other than the son of a poorwasher-woman, who was just going past the house. He stopped, andrespectfully took off his cap. The peak of this cap was broken inthe middle, so that he could easily roll it up and put it in hispocket. He stood before the mayor in his poor but clean andwell-mended clothes, with heavy wooden shoes on his feet, looking ashumble as if it had been the king himself.

"You are a good and civil boy," said the mayor. "I suppose yourmother is busy washing the clothes down by the river, and you aregoing to carry that thing to her that you have in your pocket. It isvery bad for your mother. How much have you got in it?"

"Only half a quartern," stammered the boy in a frightened voice.

"And she has had just as much this morning already?"

"No, it was yesterday," replied the boy.

"Two halves make a whole," said the mayor. "She's good fornothing. What a sad thing it is with these people. Tell your mothershe ought to be ashamed of herself. Don't you become a drunkard, but Iexpect you will though. Poor child! there, go now."

The boy went on his way with his cap in his hand, while the windfluttered his golden hair till the locks stood up straight. Heturned round the corner of the street into the little lane that led tothe river, where his mother stood in the water by her washing bench,beating the linen with a heavy wooden bar. The floodgates at themill had been drawn up, and as the water rolled rapidly on, the sheetswere dragged along by the stream, and nearly overturned the bench,so that the washer-woman was obliged to lean against it to keep itsteady. "I have been very nearly carried away," she said; "it is agood thing that you are come, for I want something to strengthen me.It is cold in the water, and I have stood here six hours. Have youbrought anything for me?"

The boy drew the bottle from his pocket, and the mother put itto her lips, and drank a little.

"Ah, how much good that does, and how it warms me," she said;"it is as good as a hot meal, and not so dear. Drink a little, my boy;you look quite pale; you are shivering in your thin clothes, andautumn has really come. Oh, how cold the water is! I hope I shallnot be ill. But no, I must not be afraid of that. Give me a littlemore, and you may have a sip too, but only a sip; you must not getused to it, my poor, dear child." She stepped up to the bridge onwhich the boy stood as she spoke, and came on shore. The water drippedfrom the straw mat which she had bound round her body, and from hergown. "I work hard and suffer pain with my poor hands," said she, "butI do it willingly, that I may be able to bring you up honestly andtruthfully, my dear boy."

At the same moment, a woman, rather older than herself, cametowards them. She was a miserable-looking object, lame of one leg, andwith a large false curl hanging down over one of her eyes, which wasblind. This curl was intended to conceal the blind eye, but it madethe defect only more visible. She was a friend of the laundress, andwas called, among the neighbors, "Lame Martha, with the curl." "Oh,you poor thing; how you do work, standing there in the water!" sheexclaimed. "You really do need something to give you a littlewarmth, and yet spiteful people cry out about the few drops you take."And then Martha repeated to the laundress, in a very few minutes,all that the mayor had said to her boy, which she had overheard; andshe felt very angry that any man could speak, as he had done, of amother to her own child, about the few drops she had taken; and shewas still more angry because, on that very day, the mayor was going tohave a dinner-party, at which there would be wine, strong, richwine, drunk by the bottle. "Many will take more than they ought, butthey don't call that drinking! They are all right, you are good fornothing indeed!" cried Martha indignantly.

"And so he spoke to you in that way, did he, my child?" said thewasher-woman, and her lips trembled as she spoke. "He says you havea mother who is good for nothing. Well, perhaps he is right, but heshould not have said it to my child. How much has happened to mefrom that house!"

"Yes," said Martha; "I remember you were in service there, andlived in the house when the mayor's parents were alive; how many yearsago that is. Bushels of salt have been eaten since then, and peoplemay well be thirsty," and Martha smiled. "The mayor's greatdinner-party to-day ought to have been put off, but the news cametoo late. The footman told me the dinner was already cooked, when aletter came to say that the mayor's younger brother in Copenhagen isdead."

"Dead!" cried the laundress, turning pale as death.

"Yes, certainly," replied Martha; "but why do you take it somuch to heart? I suppose you knew him years ago, when you were inservice there?"

"Is he dead?" she exclaimed. "Oh, he was such a kind, good-heartedman, there are not many like him," and the tears rolled down hercheeks as she spoke. Then she cried, "Oh, dear me; I feel quite ill:everything is going round me, I cannot bear it. Is the bottleempty?" and she leaned against the plank.

"Dear me, you are ill indeed," said the other woman. "Come,cheer up; perhaps it will pass off. No, indeed, I see you are reallyill; the best thing for me to do is to lead you home."

"But my washing yonder?"

"I will take care of that. Come, give me your arm. The boy canstay here and take care of the linen, and I'll come back and finishthe washing; it is but a trifle."

The limbs of the laundress shook under her, and she said, "Ihave stood too long in the cold water, and I have had nothing to eatthe whole day since the morning. O kind Heaven, help me to get home; Iam in a burning fever. Oh, my poor child," and she burst into tears.And he, poor boy, wept also, as he sat alone by the river, near to andwatching the damp linen.

The two women walked very slowly. The laundress slipped andtottered through the lane, and round the corner, into the street wherethe mayor lived; and just as she reached the front of his house, shesank down upon the pavement. Many persons came round her, and LameMartha ran into the house for help. The mayor and his guests came tothe window.

"Oh, it is the laundress," said he; "she has had a little drop toomuch. She is good for nothing. It is a sad thing for her pretty littleson. I like the boy very well; but the mother is good for nothing."

After a while the laundress recovered herself, and they led her toher poor dwelling, and put her to bed. Kind Martha warmed a mug ofbeer for her, with butter and sugar- she considered this the bestmedicine- and then hastened to the river, washed and rinsed, badlyenough, to be sure, but she did her best. Then she drew the linenashore, wet as it was, and laid it in a basket. Before evening, shewas sitting in the poor little room with the laundress. The mayor'scook had given her some roasted potatoes and a beautiful piece offat for the sick woman. Martha and the boy enjoyed these good thingsvery much; but the sick woman could only say that the smell was verynourishing, she thought. By-and-by the boy was put to bed, in the samebed as the one in which his mother lay; but he slept at her feet,covered with an old quilt made of blue and white patchwork. Thelaundress felt a little better by this time. The warm beer hadstrengthened her, and the smell of the good food had been pleasantto her.

"Many thanks, you good soul," she said to Martha. "Now the boyis asleep, I will tell you all. He is soon asleep. How gentle andsweet he looks as he lies there with his eyes closed! He does not knowhow his mother has suffered; and Heaven grant he never may know it.I was in service at the counsellor's, the father of the mayor, andit happened that the youngest of his sons, the student, came home. Iwas a young wild girl then, but honest; that I can declare in thesight of Heaven. The student was merry and gay, brave andaffectionate; every drop of blood in him was good and honorable; abetter man never lived on earth. He was the son of the house, and Iwas only a maid; but he loved me truly and honorably, and he toldhis mother of it. She was to him as an angel upon earth; she was sowise and loving. He went to travel, and before he started he placeda gold ring on my finger; and as soon as he was out of the house, mymistress sent for me. Gently and earnestly she drew me to her, andspake as if an angel were speaking. She showed me clearly, in spiritand in truth, the difference there was between him and me. 'He ispleased now,' she said, 'with your pretty face; but good looks donot last long. You have not been educated like he has. You are notequals in mind and rank, and therein lies the misfortune. I esteem thepoor,' she added. 'In the sight of God, they may occupy a higher placethan many of the rich; but here upon earth we must beware ofentering upon a false track, lest we are overturned in our plans, likea carriage that travels by a dangerous road. I know a worthy man, anartisan, who wishes to marry you. I mean Eric, the glovemaker. He is awidower, without children, and in a good position. Will you think itover?' Every word she said pierced my heart like a knife; but I knewshe was right, and the thought pressed heavily upon me. I kissed herhand, and wept bitter tears, and I wept still more when I went to myroom, and threw myself on the bed. I passed through a dreadfulnight; God knows what I suffered, and how I struggled. The followingSunday I went to the house of God to pray for light to direct my path.It seemed like a providence that as I stepped out of church Ericcame towards me; and then there remained not a doubt in my mind. Wewere suited to each other in rank and circumstances. He was, eventhen, a man of good means. I went up to him, and took his hand, andsaid, 'Do you still feel the same for me?' 'Yes; ever and always,'said he. 'Will you, then, marry a maiden who honors and esteems you,although she cannot offer you her love? but that may come.' 'Yes, itwill come,' said he; and we joined our hands together, and I went hometo my mistress. The gold ring which her son had given me I wore nextto my heart. I could not place it on my finger during the daytime, butonly in the evening, when I went to bed. I kissed the ring till mylips almost bled, and then I gave it to my mistress, and told her thatthe banns were to be put up for me and the glovemaker the followingweek. Then my mistress threw her arms round me, and kissed me. She didnot say that I was 'good for nothing;' very likely I was better thenthan I am now; but the misfortunes of this world, were unknown to methen. At Michaelmas we were married, and for the first year everythingwent well with us. We had a journeyman and an apprentice, and you wereour servant, Martha."

"Ah, yes, and you were a dear, good mistress," said Martha, "Ishall never forget how kind you and your husband were to me."

"Yes, those were happy years when you were with us, although wehad no children at first. The student I never met again. Yet I saw himonce, although he did not see me. He came to his mother's funeral. Isaw him, looking pale as death, and deeply troubled, standing at hergrave; for she was his mother. Sometime after, when his father died,he was in foreign lands, and did not come home. I know that he nevermarried, I believe he became a lawyer. He had forgotten me, and evenhad we met he would not have known me, for I have lost all my goodlooks, and perhaps that is all for the best." And then she spoke ofthe dark days of trial, when misfortune had fallen upon them.

"We had five hundred dollars," she said, "and there was a house inthe street to be sold for two hundred, so we thought it would be worthour while to pull it down and build a new one in its place; so itwas bought. The builder and carpenter made an estimate that the newhouse would cost ten hundred and twenty dollars to build. Eric hadcredit, so he borrowed the money in the chief town. But the captain,who was bringing it to him, was shipwrecked, and the money lost.Just about this time, my dear sweet boy, who lies sleeping there,was born, and my husband was attacked with a severe lingering illness.For three quarters of a year I was obliged to dress and undress him.We were backward in our payments, we borrowed more money, and all thatwe had was lost and sold, and then my husband died. Since then Ihave worked, toiled, and striven for the sake of the child. I havescrubbed and washed both coarse and fine linen, but I have not beenable to make myself better off; and it was God's will. In His own timeHe will take me to Himself, but I know He will never forsake myboy." Then she fell asleep. In the morning she felt much refreshed,and strong enough, as she thought, to go on with her work. But as soonas she stepped into the cold water, a sudden faintness seized her; sheclutched at the air convulsively with her hand, took one step forward,and fell. Her head rested on dry land, but her feet were in the water;her wooden shoes, which were only tied on by a wisp of straw, werecarried away by the stream, and thus she was found by Martha whenshe came to bring her some coffee.

In the meantime a messenger had been sent to her house by themayor, to say that she must come to him immediately, as he hadsomething to tell her. It was too late; a surgeon had been sent for toopen a vein in her arm, but the poor woman was dead.

"She has drunk herself to death," said the cruel mayor. In theletter, containing the news of his brother's death, it was stated thathe had left in his will a legacy of six hundred dollars to theglovemaker's widow, who had been his mother's maid, to be paid withdiscretion, in large or small sums to the widow or her child.

"There was something between my brother and her, I remember," saidthe mayor; "it is a good thing that she is out of the way, for now theboy will have the whole. I will place him with honest people tobring him up, that he may become a respectable working man." And theblessing of God rested upon these words. The mayor sent for the boy tocome to him, and promised to take care of him, but most cruellyadded that it was a good thing that his mother was dead, for "shewas good for nothing." They carried her to the churchyard, thechurchyard in which the poor were buried. Martha strewed sand on thegrave and planted a rose-tree upon it, and the boy stood by her side.

"Oh, my poor mother!" he cried, while the tears rolled down hischeeks. "Is it true what they say, that she was good for nothing?"

"No, indeed, it is not true," replied the old servant, raising hereyes to heaven; "she was worth a great deal; I knew it years ago,and since the last night of her life I am more certain of it thanever. I say she was a good and worthy woman, and God, who is inheaven, knows I am speaking the truth, though the world may say,even now she was good for nothing."

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   SOMETHING

   by Hans Christian AndersenSOMETHING

"I MEAN to be somebody, and do something useful in the world,"said the eldest of five brothers. "I don't care how humble my positionis, so that I can only do some good, which will be something. I intendto be a brickmaker; bricks are always wanted, and I shall be reallydoing something."

"Your 'something' is not enough for me," said the secondbrother; "what you talk of doing is nothing at all, it is journeyman'swork, or might even be done by a machine. No! I should prefer to bea builder at once, there is something real in that. A man gains aposition, he becomes a citizen, has his own sign, his own house ofcall for his workmen: so I shall be a builder. If all goes well, intime I shall become a master, and have my own journeymen, and mywife will be treated as a master's wife. This is what I callsomething."

"I call it all nothing," said the third; "not in reality anyposition. There are many in a town far above a master builder inposition. You may be an upright man, but even as a master you willonly be ranked among common men. I know better what to do than that. Iwill be an architect, which will place me among those who possessriches and intellect, and who speculate in art. I shall certainly haveto rise by my own endeavors from a bricklayer's laborer, or as acarpenter's apprentice- a lad wearing a paper cap, although I now weara silk hat. I shall have to fetch beer and spirits for the journeymen,and they will call me 'thou,' which will be an insult. I shallendure it, however, for I shall look upon it all as a mererepresentation, a masquerade, a mummery, which to-morrow, that is,when I myself as a journeyman, shall have served my time, will vanish,and I shall go my way, and all that has passed will be nothing tome. Then I shall enter the academy, and get instructed in drawing, andbe called an architect. I may even attain to rank, and havesomething placed before or after my name, and I shall build asothers have done before me. By this there will be always 'something'to make me remembered, and is not that worth living for?"

"Not in my opinion," said the fourth; "I will never follow thelead of others, and only imitate what they have done. I will be agenius, and become greater than all of you together. I will create anew style of building, and introduce a plan for erecting housessuitable to the climate, with material easily obtained in the country,and thus suit national feeling and the developments of the age,besides building a storey for my own genius."

"But supposing the climate and the material are not good formuch," said the fifth brother, "that would be very unfortunate foryou, and have an influence over your experiments. Nationality mayassert itself until it becomes affectation, and the developments ofa century may run wild, as youth often does. I see clearly that noneof you will ever really be anything worth notice, however you maynow fancy it. But do as you like, I shall not imitate you. I mean tokeep clear of all these things, and criticize what you do. In everyaction something imperfect may be discovered, something not right,which I shall make it my business to find out and expose; that will besomething, I fancy." And he kept his word, and became a critic.

People said of this fifth brother, "There is something veryprecise about him; he has a good head-piece, but he does nothing." Andon that very account they thought he must be something.

Now, you see, this is a little history which will never end; aslong as the world exists, there will always be men like these fivebrothers. And what became of them? Were they each nothing orsomething? You shall hear; it is quite a history.

The eldest brother, he who fabricated bricks, soon discovered thateach brick, when finished, brought him in a small coin, if only acopper one; and many copper pieces, if placed one upon another, can bechanged into a shining shilling; and at whatever door a person knocks,who has a number of these in his hands, whether it be the baker's, thebutcher's, or the tailor's, the door flies open, and he can get all hewants. So you see the value of bricks. Some of the bricks, however,crumbled to pieces, or were broken, but the elder brother found ause for even these.

On the high bank of earth, which formed a dyke on the sea-coast, apoor woman named Margaret wished to build herself a house, so allthe imperfect bricks were given to her, and a few whole ones withthem; for the eldest brother was a kind-hearted man, although he neverachieved anything higher than making bricks. The poor woman builtherself a little house- it was small and narrow, and the window wasquite crooked, the door too low, and the straw roof might have beenbetter thatched. But still it was a shelter, and from within you couldlook far over the sea, which dashed wildly against the sea-wall onwhich the little house was built. The salt waves sprinkled their whitefoam over it, but it stood firm, and remained long after he who hadgiven the bricks to build it was dead and buried.

The second brother of course knew better how to build than poorMargaret, for he served an apprenticeship to learn it. When his timewas up, he packed up his knapsack, and went on his travels, singingthe journeyman's song,-

 "While young, I can wander without a care,

 And build new houses everywhere;

 Fair and bright are my dreams of home,

 Always thought of wherever I roam.

 Hurrah for a workman's life of glee!

 There's a loved one at home who thinks of me;

 Home and friends I can ne'er forget,

 And I mean to be a master yet."And that is what he did. On his return home, he became a masterbuilder,- built one house after another in the town, till theyformed quite a street, which, when finished, became really an ornamentto the town. These houses built a house for him in return, which wasto be his own. But how can houses build a house? If the houses wereasked, they could not answer; but the people would understand, andsay, "Certainly the street built his house for him." It was not verylarge, and the floor was of lime; but when he danced with his bride onthe lime-covered floor, it was to him white and shining, and fromevery stone in the wall flowers seemed to spring forth and decoratethe room as with the richest tapestry. It was really a pretty house,and in it were a happy pair. The flag of the corporation flutteredbefore it, and the journeymen and apprentices shouted "Hurrah." He hadgained his position, he had made himself something, and at last hedied, which was "something" too.

Now we come to the architect, the third brother, who had beenfirst a carpenter's apprentice, had worn a cap, and served as anerrand boy, but afterwards went to the academy, and risen to be anarchitect, a high and noble gentleman. Ah yes, the houses of the newstreet, which the brother who was a master builder erected, may havebuilt his house for him, but the street received its name from thearchitect, and the handsomest house in the street became his property.That was something, and he was "something," for he had a list oftitles before and after his name. His children were called "wellborn,"and when he died, his widow was treated as a lady of position, andthat was "something." His name remained always written at the cornerof the street, and lived in every one's mouth as its name. Yes, thisalso was something."

And what about the genius of the family- the fourth brother- whowanted to invent something new and original? He tried to build a loftystorey himself, but it fell to pieces, and he fell with it and brokehis neck. However, he had a splendid funeral, with the city flagsand music in the procession; flowers were strewn on the pavement,and three orations were spoken over his grave, each one longer thanthe other. He would have liked this very much during his life, as wellas the poems about him in the papers, for he liked nothing so wellas to be talked of. A monument was also erected over his grave. It wasonly another storey over him, but that was "something," Now he wasdead, like the three other brothers.

The youngest- the critic- outlived them all, which was quite rightfor him. It gave him the opportunity of having the last word, which tohim was of great importance. People always said he had a goodhead-piece. At last his hour came, and he died, and arrived at thegates of heaven. Souls always enter these gates in pairs; so hefound himself standing and waiting for admission with another; and whoshould it be but old dame Margaret, from the house on the dyke! "It isevidently for the sake of contrast that I and this wretched soulshould arrive here exactly at the same time," said the critic. "Praywho are you, my good woman?" said he; "do you want to get in heretoo?"

And the old woman curtsied as well as she could; she thought itmust be St. Peter himself who spoke to her. "I am a poor old woman,"she said, "without my family. I am old Margaret, that lived in thehouse on the dyke."

"Well, and what have you done- what great deed have youperformed down below?"

"I have done nothing at all in the world that could give me aclaim to have these doors open for me," she said. "It would be onlythrough mercy that I can be allowed to slip in through the gate."

"In what manner did you leave the world?" he asked, just for thesake of saying something; for it made him feel very weary to standthere and wait.

"How I left the world?" she replied; "why, I can scarcely tellyou. During the last years of my life I was sick and miserable, andI was unable to bear creeping out of bed suddenly into the frost andcold. Last winter was a hard winter, but I have got over it all now.There were a few mild days, as your honor, no doubt, knows. The icelay thickly on the lake, as far one could see. The people came fromthe town, and walked upon it, and they say there were dancing andskating upon it, I believe, and a great feasting. The sound ofbeautiful music came into my poor little room where I lay. Towardsevening, when the moon rose beautifully, though not yet in her fullsplendor, I glanced from my bed over the wide sea; and there, justwhere the sea and sky met, rose a curious white cloud. I lay lookingat the cloud till I observed a little black spot in the middle ofit, which gradually grew larger and larger, and then I knew what itmeant- I am old and experienced; and although this token is notoften seen, I knew it, and a shuddering seized me. Twice in my lifehad I seen this same thing, and I knew that there would be an awfulstorm, with a spring tide, which would overwhelm the poor people whowere now out on the ice, drinking, dancing, and making merry. Youngand old, the whole city, were there; who was to warn them, if no onenoticed the sign, or knew what it meant as I did? I was so alarmed,that I felt more strength and life than I had done for some time. Igot out of bed, and reached the window; I could not crawl anyfarther from weakness and exhaustion; but I managed to open thewindow. I saw the people outside running and jumping about on the ice;I saw the beautiful flags waving in the wind; I heard the boysshouting, 'Hurrah!' and the lads and lasses singing, and everythingfull of merriment and joy. But there was the white cloud with theblack spot hanging over them. I cried out as loudly as I could, but noone heard me; I was too far off from the people. Soon would thestorm burst, the ice break, and all who were on it be irretrievablylost. They could not hear me, and to go to them was quite out of mypower. Oh, if I could only get them safe on land! Then came thethought, as if from heaven, that I would rather set fire to my bed,and let the house be burnt down, than that so many people shouldperish miserably. I got a light, and in a few moments the red flamesleaped up as a beacon to them. I escaped fortunately as far as thethreshold of the door; but there I fell down and remained: I couldgo no farther. The flames rushed out towards me, flickered on thewindow, and rose high above the roof. The people on the ice becameaware of the fire, and ran as fast as possible to help a poor sickwoman, who, as they thought, was being burnt to death. There was notone who did not run. I heard them coming, and I also at the sametime was conscious of a rush of air and a sound like the roar of heavyartillery. The spring flood was lifting the ice covering, whichbrake into a thousand pieces. But the people had reached the sea-wall,where the sparks were flying round. I had saved them all; but Isuppose I could not survive the cold and fright; so I came up hereto the gates of paradise. I am told they are open to poor creaturessuch as I am, and I have now no house left on earth; but I do notthink that will give me a claim to be admitted here."

Then the gates were opened, and an angel led the old woman in. Shehad dropped one little straw out of her straw bed, when she set iton fire to save the lives of so many. It had been changed into thepurest gold- into gold that constantly grew and expanded intoflowers and fruit of immortal beauty.

"See," said the angel, pointing to the wonderful straw, "this iswhat the poor woman has brought. What dost thou bring? I know thouhast accomplished nothing, not even made a single brick. Even ifthou couldst return, and at least produce so much, very likely, whenmade, the brick would be useless, unless done with a good will,which is always something. But thou canst not return to earth, and Ican do nothing for thee."

Then the poor soul, the old mother who had lived in the house onthe dyke, pleaded for him. She said, "His brother made all the stoneand bricks, and sent them to me to build my poor little dwelling,which was a great deal to do for a poor woman like me. Could not allthese bricks and pieces be as a wall of stone to prevail for him? Itis an act of mercy; he is wanting it now; and here is the veryfountain of mercy."

"Then," said the angel, "thy brother, he who has been lookedupon as the meanest of you all, he whose honest deeds to thee appearedso humble,- it is he who has sent you this heavenly gift. Thou shaltnot be turned away. Thou shalt have permission to stand without thegate and reflect, and repent of thy life on earth; but thou shaltnot be admitted here until thou hast performed one good deed ofrepentance, which will indeed for thee be something."

"I could have expressed that better," thought the critic; but hedid not say it aloud, which for him was SOMETHING, after all.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   SOUP FROM A SAUSAGE SKEWER

   by Hans Christian Andersen

"WE had such an excellent dinner yesterday," said an old mouseof the female sex to another who had not been present at the feast. "Isat number twenty-one below the mouse-king, which was not a bad place.Shall I tell you what we had? Everything was first rate. Mouldy bread,tallow candle, and sausage. And then, when we had finished thatcourse, the same came on all over again; it was as good as two feasts.We were very sociable, and there was as much joking and fun as if wehad been all of one family circle. Nothing was left but the sausageskewers, and this formed a subject of conversation, till at last itturned to the proverb, 'Soup from sausage skins;' or, as the people inthe neighboring country call it, 'Soup from a sausage skewer.' Everyone had heard the proverb, but no one had ever tasted the soup, muchless prepared it. A capital toast was drunk to the inventor of thesoup, and some one said he ought to be made a relieving officer to thepoor. Was not that witty? Then the old mouse-king rose and promisedthat the young lady-mouse who should learn how best to prepare thismuch-admired and savory soup should be his queen, and a year and a dayshould be allowed for the purpose."

"That was not at all a bad proposal," said the other mouse; "buthow is the soup made?"

"Ah, that is more than I can tell you. All the young lady micewere asking the same question. They wished very much to be queen,but they did not want to take the trouble of going out into theworld to learn how to make soup, which was absolutely necessary tobe done first. But it is not every one who would care to leave herfamily, or her happy corner by the fire-side at home, even to bemade queen. It is not always easy to find bacon and cheese-rind inforeign lands every day, and it is not pleasant to have to endurehunger, and be perhaps, after all, eaten up alive by the cat."

"Most probably some such thoughts as these discouraged themajority from going out into the world to collect the requiredinformation. Only four mice gave notice that they were ready to setout on the journey. They were young and lively, but poor. Each of themwished to visit one of the four divisions of the world, so that itmight be seen which was the most favored by fortune. Every one tooka sausage skewer as a traveller's staff, and to remind them of theobject of their journey. They left home early in May, and none of themreturned till the first of May in the following year, and then onlythree of them. Nothing was seen or heard of the fourth, although theday of decision was close at hand. "Ah, yes, there is always sometrouble mixed up with the greatest pleasure," said the mouse-king; buthe gave orders that all the mice within a circle of many milesshould be invited at once. They were to assemble in the kitchen, andthe three travelled mice were to stand in a row before them, while asausage skewer, covered with crape, was to be stuck up instead ofthe missing mouse. No one dared to express an opinion until the kingspoke, and desired one of them to go on with her story. And now weshall hear what she said.

   WHAT THE FIRST LITTLE MOUSE

   SAW AND HEARD ON HER TRAVELS

"When I first went out into the world," said the little mouse,"I fancied, as so many of my age do, that I already knew everything,but it was not so. It takes years to acquire great knowledge. I wentat once to sea in a ship bound for the north. I had been told that theship's cook must know how to prepare every dish at sea, and it is easyenough to do that with plenty of sides of bacon, and large tubs ofsalt meat and mouldy flour. There I found plenty of delicate food, butno opportunity for learning how to make soup from a sausage skewer. Wesailed on for many days and nights; the ship rocked fearfully, andwe did not escape without a wetting. As soon as we arrived at the portto which the ship was bound, I left it, and went on shore at a placefar towards the north. It is a wonderful thing to leave your ownlittle corner at home, to hide yourself in a ship where there are sureto be some nice snug corners for shelter, then suddenly to findyourself thousands of miles away in a foreign land. I saw largepathless forests of pine and birch trees, which smelt so strong that Isneezed and thought of sausage. There were great lakes also whichlooked as black as ink at a distance, but were quite clear when I cameclose to them. Large swans were floating upon them, and I thought atfirst they were only foam, they lay so still; but when I saw them walkand fly, I knew what they were directly. They belong to the goosespecies, one can see that by their walk. No one can attempt todisguise family descent. I kept with my own kind, and associatedwith the forest and field mice, who, however, knew very little,especially about what I wanted to know, and which had actually made metravel abroad. The idea that soup could be made from a sausageskewer was to them such an out-of-the-way, unlikely thought, that itwas repeated from one to another through the whole forest. Theydeclared that the problem would never be solved, that the thing was animpossibility. How little I thought that in this place, on the veryfirst night, I should be initiated into the manner of its preparation.

"It was the height of summer, which the mice told me was thereason that the forest smelt so strong, and that the herbs were sofragrant, and the lakes with the white swimming swans so dark, and yetso clear. On the margin of the wood, near to three or four houses, apole, as large as the mainmast of a ship, had been erected, and fromthe summit hung wreaths of flowers and fluttering ribbons; it wasthe Maypole. Lads and lasses danced round the pole, and tried to outdothe violins of the musicians with their singing. They were as merry asever at sunset and in the moonlight, but I took no part in themerry-making. What has a little mouse to do with a Maypole dance? Isat in the soft moss, and held my sausage skewer tight. The moon threwits beams particularly on one spot where stood a tree covered withexceedingly fine moss. I may almost venture to say that it was as fineand soft as the fur of the mouse-king, but it was green, which is acolor very agreeable to the eye. All at once I saw the most charminglittle people marching towards me. They did not reach higher than myknee; they looked like human beings, but were better proportioned, andthey called themselves elves. Their clothes were very delicate andfine, for they were made of the leaves of flowers, trimmed with thewings of flies and gnats, which had not a bad effect. By their manner,it appeared as if they were seeking for something. I knew not what,till at last one of them espied me and came towards me, and theforemost pointed to my sausage skewer, and said, 'There, that isjust what we want; see, it is pointed at the top; is it notcapital?' and the longer he looked at my pilgrim's staff, the moredelighted he became. 'I will lend it to you,' said I, 'but not tokeep.'

"'Oh no, we won't keep it!' they all cried; and then they seizedthe skewer, which I gave up to them, and danced with it to the spotwhere the delicate moss grew, and set it up in the middle of thegreen. They wanted a maypole, and the one they now had seemed cutout on purpose for them. Then they decorated it so beautifully that itwas quite dazzling to look at. Little spiders spun golden threadsaround it, and then it was hung with fluttering veils and flags sodelicately white that they glittered like snow in the moonshine. Afterthat they took colors from the butterfly's wing, and sprinkled themover the white drapery "which gleamed as if covered with flowers anddiamonds, so that I could not recognize my sausage skewer at all. Sucha maypole had never been seen in all the world as this. Then came agreat company of real elves. Nothing could be finer than theirclothes, and they invited me to be present at the feast; but I wasto keep at a certain distance, because I was too large for them.Then commenced such music that it sounded like a thousand glass bells,and was so full and strong that I thought it must be the song of theswans. I fancied also that I heard the voices of the cuckoo and theblack-bird, and it seemed at last as if the whole forest sent forthglorious melodies- the voices of children, the tinkling of bells,and the songs of the birds; and all this wonderful melody came fromthe elfin maypole. My sausage peg was a complete peal of bells. Icould scarcely believe that so much could have been produced fromit, till I remembered into what hands it had fallen. I was so muchaffected that I wept tears such as a little mouse can weep, but theywere tears of joy. The night was far too short for me; there are nolong nights there in summer, as we often have in this part of theworld. When the morning dawned, and the gentle breeze rippled theglassy mirror of the forest lake, all the delicate veils and flagsfluttered away into thin air; the waving garlands of the spider's web,the hanging bridges and galleries, or whatever else they may becalled, vanished away as if they had never been. Six elves broughtme back my sausage skewer, and at the same time asked me to make anyrequest, which they would grant if in their power; so I begged them,if they could, to tell me how to make soup from a sausage skewer.

"'How do we make it?' said the chief of the elves with a smile.'Why you have just seen it; you scarcely knew your sausage skeweragain, I am sure.'

"They think themselves very wise, thought I to myself. Then I toldthem all about it, and why I had travelled so far, and also whatpromise had been made at home to the one who should discover themethod of preparing this soup. 'What use will it be,' I asked, 'to themouse-king or to our whole mighty kingdom that I have seen all thesebeautiful things? I cannot shake the sausage peg and say, Look, hereis the skewer, and now the soup will come. That would only produce adish to be served when people were keeping a fast.'

"Then the elf dipped his finger into the cup of a violet, and saidto me, 'Look here, I will anoint your pilgrim's staff, so that whenyou return to your own home and enter the king's castle, you have onlyto touch the king with your staff, and violets will spring forth andcover the whole of it, even in the coldest winter time; so I think Ihave given you really something to carry home, and a little morethan something.'"

But before the little mouse explained what this something morewas, she stretched her staff out to the king, and as it touched himthe most beautiful bunch of violets sprang forth and filled theplace with perfume. The smell was so powerful that the mouse-kingordered the mice who stood nearest the chimney to thrust their tailsinto the fire, that there might be a smell of burning, for the perfumeof the violets was overpowering, and not the sort of scent thatevery one liked.

"But what was the something more of which you spoke just now?"asked the mouse-king.

"Why," answered the little mouse, "I think it is what they call'effect;'" and thereupon she turned the staff round, and behold nota single flower was to be seen upon it! She now only held the nakedskewer, and lifted it up as a conductor lifts his baton at aconcert. "Violets, the elf told me," continued the mouse, "are for thesight, the smell, and the touch; so we have only now to produce theeffect of hearing and tasting;" and then, as the little mouse beattime with her staff, there came sounds of music, not such music as washeard in the forest, at the elfin feast, but such as is often heard inthe kitchen- the sounds of boiling and roasting. It came quitesuddenly, like wind rushing through the chimneys, and seemed as ifevery pot and kettle were boiling over. The fire-shovel clattered downon the brass fender; and then, quite as suddenly, all was still,-nothing could be heard but the light, vapory song of the tea-kettle,which was quite wonderful to hear, for no one could rightlydistinguish whether the kettle was just beginning to boil or goingto stop. And the little pot steamed, and the great pot simmered, butwithout any regard for each; indeed there seemed no sense in thepots at all. And as the little mouse waved her baton still morewildly, the pots foamed and threw up bubbles, and boiled over; whileagain the wind roared and whistled through the chimney, and at lastthere was such a terrible hubbub, that the little mouse let herstick fall.

"That is a strange sort of soup," said the mouse-king; "shall wenot now hear about the preparation?"

"That is all," answered the little mouse, with a bow.

"That all!" said the mouse-king; "then we shall be glad to hearwhat information the next may have to give us."

WHAT THE SECOND MOUSE HAD TO TELL

"I was born in the library, at a castle," said the second mouse."Very few members of our family ever had the good fortune to getinto the dining-room, much less the store-room. On my journey, andhere to-day, are the only times I have ever seen a kitchen. We wereoften obliged to suffer hunger in the library, but then we gained agreat deal of knowledge. The rumor reached us of the royal prizeoffered to those who should be able to make soup from a sausageskewer. Then my old grandmother sought out a manuscript which,however, she could not read, but had heard it read, and in it waswritten, 'Those who are poets can make soup of sausage skewers.' Shethen asked me if I was a poet. I felt myself quite innocent of anysuch pretensions. Then she said I must go out and make myself apoet. I asked again what I should be required to do, for it seemedto me quite as difficult as to find out how to make soup of asausage skewer. My grandmother had heard a great deal of reading inher day, and she told me three principal qualifications werenecessary- understanding, imagination, and feeling. 'If you can manageto acquire these three, you will be a poet, and the sausage-skewersoup will be quite easy to you.'

"So I went forth into the world, and turned my steps towards thewest, that I might become a poet. Understanding is the mostimportant matter in everything. I knew that, for the two otherqualifications are not thought much of; so I went first to seek forunderstanding. Where was I to find it? 'Go to the ant and learnwisdom,' said the great Jewish king. I knew that from living in alibrary. So I went straight on till I came to the first greatant-hill, and then I set myself to watch, that I might become wise.The ants are a very respectable people, they are wisdom itself. Allthey do is like the working of a sum in arithmetic, which comes right.'To work and to lay eggs,' say they, and to provide for posterity,is to live out your time properly;' and that they truly do. They aredivided into the clean and the dirty ants, their rank is pointed outby a number, and the ant-queen is number ONE; and her opinion is theonly correct one on everything; she seems to have the whole wisdomof the world in her, which was just the important matter I wished toacquire. She said a great deal which was no doubt very clever; yetto me it sounded like nonsense. She said the ant-hill was the loftiestthing in the world, and yet close to the mound stood a tall tree,which no one could deny was loftier, much loftier, but no mentionwas made of the tree. One evening an ant lost herself on this tree;she had crept up the stem, not nearly to the top, but higher thanany ant had ever ventured; and when at last she returned home she saidthat she had found something in her travels much higher than theant-hill. The rest of the ants considered this an insult to thewhole community; so she was condemned to wear a muzzle and to livein perpetual solitude. A short time afterwards another ant got onthe tree, and made the same journey and the same discovery, but shespoke of it cautiously and indefinitely, and as she was one of thesuperior ants and very much respected, they believed her, and when shedied they erected an eggshell as a monument to her memory, for theycultivated a great respect for science. I saw," said the little mouse,"that the ants were always running to and fro with her burdens ontheir backs. Once I saw one of them drop her load; she gave herselfa great deal of trouble in trying to raise it again, but she could notsucceed. Then two others came up and tried with all their strengthto help her, till they nearly dropped their own burdens in doing so;then they were obliged to stop for a moment in their help, for everyone must think of himself first. And the ant-queen remarked that theirconduct that day showed that they possessed kind hearts and goodunderstanding. 'These two qualities,' she continued, 'place us ants inthe highest degree above all other reasonable beings. Understandingmust therefore be seen among us in the most prominent manner, and mywisdom is greater than all.' And so saying she raised herself on hertwo hind legs, that no one else might be mistaken for her. I could nottherefore make an error, so I ate her up. We are to go to the antsto learn wisdom, and I had got the queen.

"I now turned and went nearer to the lofty tree already mentioned,which was an oak. It had a tall trunk with a wide-spreading top, andwas very old. I knew that a living being dwelt here, a dryad as she iscalled, who is born with the tree and dies with it. I had heard thisin the library, and here was just such a tree, and in it anoak-maiden. She uttered a terrible scream when she caught sight ofme so near to her; like many women, she was very much afraid ofmice. And she had more real cause for fear than they have, for I mighthave gnawed through the tree on which her life depended. I spoke toher in a kind and friendly manner, and begged her to take courage.At last she took me up in her delicate hand, and then I told herwhat had brought me out into the world, and she promised me thatperhaps on that very evening she should be able to obtain for me oneof the two treasures for which I was seeking. She told me thatPhantaesus was her very dear friend, that he was as beautiful as thegod of love, that he remained often for many hours with her underthe leafy boughs of the tree which then rustled and waved more thanever over them both. He called her his dryad, she said, and the treehis tree; for the grand old oak, with its gnarled trunk, was just tohis taste. The root, spreading deep into the earth, the top risinghigh in the fresh air, knew the value of the drifted snow, the keenwind, and the warm sunshine, as it ought to be known. 'Yes,' continuedthe dryad, 'the birds sing up above in the branches, and talk toeach other about the beautiful fields they have visited in foreignlands; and on one of the withered boughs a stork has built hisnest,- it is beautifully arranged, and besides it is pleasant tohear a little about the land of the pyramids. All this pleasesPhantaesus, but it is not enough for him; I am obliged to relate tohim of my life in the woods; and to go back to my childhood, when Iwas little, and the tree so small and delicate that astinging-nettle could overshadow it, and I have to tell everythingthat has happened since then till now that the tree is so large andstrong. Sit you down now under the green bindwood and pay attention,when Phantaesus comes I will find an opportunity to lay hold of hiswing and to pull out one of the little feathers. That feather youshall have; a better was never given to any poet, it will be quiteenough for you.'

"And when Phantaesus came the feather was plucked, and," saidthe little mouse, "I seized and put it in water, and kept it theretill it was quite soft. It was very heavy and indigestible, but Imanaged to nibble it up at last. It is not so easy to nibble one'sself into a poet, there are so many things to get through. Now,however, I had two of them, understanding and imagination; and throughthese I knew that the third was to be found in the library. A greatman has said and written that there are novels whose sole and only useappeared to be that they might relieve mankind of overflowing tears- akind of sponge, in fact, for sucking up feelings and emotions. Iremembered a few of these books, they had always appeared temptingto the appetite; they had been much read, and were so greasy, thatthey must have absorbed no end of emotions in themselves. I retracedmy steps to the library, and literally devoured a whole novel, thatis, properly speaking, the interior or soft part of it; the crust,or binding, I left. When I had digested not only this, but a second, Ifelt a stirring within me; then I ate a small piece of a thirdromance, and felt myself a poet. I said it to myself, and toldothers the same. I had head-ache and back-ache, and I cannot tell whataches besides. I thought over all the stories that may be said to beconnected with sausage pegs, and all that has ever been writtenabout skewers, and sticks, and staves, and splinters came to mythoughts; the ant-queen must have had a wonderfully clearunderstanding. I remembered the man who placed a white stick in hismouth by which he could make himself and the stick invisible. Ithought of sticks as hobby-horses, staves of music or rhyme, ofbreaking a stick over a man's back, and heaven knows how many morephrases of the same sort relating to sticks, staves, and skewers.All my thoughts rein on skewers, sticks of wood, and staves; and asI am, at last, a poet, and I have worked terribly hard to makemyself one, I can of course make poetry on anything. I shall thereforebe able to wait upon you every day in the week with a poetical historyof a skewer. And that is my soup."

"In that case," said the mouse-king, "we will hear what thethird mouse has to say."

"Squeak, squeak," cried a little mouse at the kitchen door; it wasthe fourth, and not the third, of the four who were contending for theprize, one whom the rest supposed to be dead. She shot in like anarrow, and overturned the sausage peg that had been covered withcrape. She had been running day and night. She had watched anopportunity to get into a goods train, and had travelled by therailway; and yet she had arrived almost too late. She pressed forward,looking very much ruffled. She had lost her sausage skewer, but nother voice; for she began to speak at once as if they only waited forher, and would hear her only, and as if nothing else in the worldwas of the least consequence. She spoke out so clearly and plainly,and she had come in so suddenly, that no one had time to stop her orto say a word while she was speaking. And now let us hear what shesaid.

WHAT THE FOURTH MOUSE, WHO SPOKE

  BEFORE THE THIRD, HAD TO TELL

"I started off at once to the largest town," said she, "but thename of it has escaped me. I have a very bad memory for names. I wascarried from the railway, with some forfeited goods, to the jail,and on arriving I made my escape, and ran into the house of theturnkey. The turnkey was speaking of his prisoners, especially ofone who had uttered thoughtless words. These words had given rise toother words, and at length they were written down and registered: 'Thewhole affair is like making soup of sausage skewers,' said he, 'butthe soup may cost him his neck.'

"Now this raised in me an interest for the prisoner," continuedthe little mouse, "and I watched my opportunity, and slipped intohis apartment, for there is a mouse-hole to be found behind everyclosed door. The prisoner looked pale; he had a great beard and large,sparkling eyes. There was a lamp burning, but the walls were soblack that they only looked the blacker for it. The prisoner scratchedpictures and verses with white chalk on the black walls, but I did notread the verses. I think he found his confinement wearisome, so that Iwas a welcome guest. He enticed me with bread-crumbs, withwhistling, and with gentle words, and seemed so friendly towards me,that by degrees I gained confidence in him, and we became friends;he divided his bread and water with me, gave me cheese and sausage,and I really began to love him. Altogether, I must own that it was avery pleasant intimacy. He let me run about on his hand, and on hisarm, and into his sleeve; and I even crept into his beard, and hecalled me his little friend. I forgot what I had come out into theworld for; forgot my sausage skewer which I had laid in a crack in thefloor- it is lying there still. I wished to stay with him always whereI was, for I knew that if I went away the poor prisoner would haveno one to be his friend, which is a sad thing. I stayed, but he didnot. He spoke to me so mournfully for the last time, gave me double asmuch bread and cheese as usual, and kissed his hand to me. Then hewent away, and never came back. I know nothing more of his history.

"The jailer took possession of me now. He said something aboutsoup from a sausage skewer, but I could not trust him. He took me inhis hand certainly, but it was to place me in a cage like atread-mill. Oh how dreadful it was! I had to run round and roundwithout getting any farther in advance, and only to make everybodylaugh. The jailer's grand-daughter was a charming little thing. Shehad curly hair like the brightest gold, merry eyes, and such a smilingmouth.

"'You poor little mouse,' said she, one day as she peeped intomy cage, 'I will set you free.' She then drew forth the ironfastening, and I sprang out on the window-sill, and from thence to theroof. Free! free! that was all I could think of; not of the objectof my journey. It grew dark, and as night was coming on I found alodging in an old tower, where dwelt a watchman and an owl. I had noconfidence in either of them, least of all in the owl, which is like acat, and has a great failing, for she eats mice. One may however bemistaken sometimes; and so was I, for this was a respectable andwell-educated old owl, who knew more than the watchman, and even asmuch as I did myself. The young owls made a great fuss abouteverything, but the only rough words she would say to them were,'You had better go and make some soup from sausage skewers.' She wasvery indulgent and loving to her children. Her conduct gave me suchconfidence in her, that from the crack where I sat I called out'squeak.' This confidence of mine pleased her so much that she assuredme she would take me under her own protection, and that not a creatureshould do me harm. The fact was, she wickedly meant to keep me inreserve for her own eating in winter, when food would be scarce. Yetshe was a very clever lady-owl; she explained to me that thewatchman could only hoot with the horn that hung loose at his side;and then she said he is so terribly proud of it, that he imagineshimself an owl in the tower;- wants to do great things, but onlysucceeds in small; all soup on a sausage skewer. Then I begged the owlto give me the recipe for this soup. 'Soup from a sausage skewer,'said she, 'is only a proverb amongst mankind, and may be understood inmany ways. Each believes his own way the best, and after all, theproverb signifies nothing.' 'Nothing!' I exclaimed. I was quitestruck. Truth is not always agreeable, but truth is above everythingelse, as the old owl said. I thought over all this, and saw quiteplainly that if truth was really so far above everything else, it mustbe much more valuable than soup from a sausage skewer. So I hastenedto get away, that I might be home in time, and bring what washighest and best, and above everything- namely, the truth. The miceare an enlightened people, and the mouse-king is above them all. He istherefore capable of making me queen for the sake of truth."

"Your truth is a falsehood," said the mouse who had not yetspoken; "I can prepare the soup, and I mean to do so."

 HOW IT WAS PREPARED

"I did not travel," said the third mouse; "I stayed in thiscountry: that was the right way. One gains nothing by travelling-everything can be acquired here quite as easily; so I stayed athome. I have not obtained what I know from supernatural beings. I haveneither swallowed it, nor learnt it from conversing with owls. Ihave got it all from my reflections and thoughts. Will you now set thekettle on the fire- so? Now pour the water in- quite full- up to thebrim; place it on the fire; make up a good blaze; keep it burning,that the water may boil; it must boil over and over. There, now Ithrow in the skewer. Will the mouse-king be pleased now to dip histail into the boiling water, and stir it round with the tail. Thelonger the king stirs it, the stronger the soup will become. Nothingmore is necessary, only to stir it."

"Can no one else do this?" asked the king.

"No," said the mouse; "only in the tail of the mouse-king isthis power contained."

And the water boiled and bubbled, as the mouse-king stood closebeside the kettle. It seemed rather a dangerous performance; but heturned round, and put out his tail, as mice do in a dairy, when theywish to skim the cream from a pan of milk with their tails andafterwards lick it off. But the mous

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   THE ANGEL

   by Hans Christian Andersen

"WHENEVER a good child dies, an angel of God comes down fromheaven, takes the dead child in his arms, spreads out his greatwhite wings, and flies with him over all the places which the childhad loved during his life. Then he gathers a large handful of flowers,which he carries up to the Almighty, that they may bloom more brightlyin heaven than they do on earth. And the Almighty presses theflowers to His heart, but He kisses the flower that pleases Himbest, and it receives a voice, and is able to join the song of thechorus of bliss."

These words were spoken by an angel of God, as he carried a deadchild up to heaven, and the child listened as if in a dream. Then theypassed over well-known spots, where the little one had often played,and through beautiful gardens full of lovely flowers.

"Which of these shall we take with us to heaven to be transplantedthere?" asked the angel.

Close by grew a slender, beautiful, rose-bush, but some wickedhand had broken the stem, and the half-opened rosebuds hung fadedand withered on the trailing branches.

"Poor rose-bush!" said the child, "let us take it with us toheaven, that it may bloom above in God's garden."

The angel took up the rose-bush; then he kissed the child, and thelittle one half opened his eyes. The angel gathered also somebeautiful flowers, as well as a few humble buttercups andheart's-ease.

"Now we have flowers enough," said the child; but the angel onlynodded, he did not fly upward to heaven.

It was night, and quite still in the great town. Here theyremained, and the angel hovered over a small, narrow street, inwhich lay a large heap of straw, ashes, and sweepings from thehouses of people who had removed. There lay fragments of plates,pieces of plaster, rags, old hats, and other rubbish not pleasant tosee. Amidst all this confusion, the angel pointed to the pieces of abroken flower-pot, and to a lump of earth which had fallen out ofit. The earth had been kept from falling to pieces by the roots of awithered field-flower, which had been thrown amongst the rubbish.

"We will take this with us," said the angel, "I will tell youwhy as we fly along."

And as they flew the angel related the history.

"Down in that narrow lane, in a low cellar, lived a poor sick boy;he had been afflicted from his childhood, and even in his best days hecould just manage to walk up and down the room on crutches once ortwice, but no more. During some days in summer, the sunbeams would lieon the floor of the cellar for about half an hour. In this spot thepoor sick boy would sit warming himself in the sunshine, andwatching the red blood through his delicate fingers as he held thembefore his face. Then he would say he had been out, yet he knewnothing of the green forest in its spring verdure, till a neighbor'sson brought him a green bough from a beech-tree. This he would placeover his head, and fancy that he was in the beech-wood while the sunshone, and the birds carolled gayly. One spring day the neighbor's boybrought him some field-flowers, and among them was one to which theroot still adhered. This he carefully planted in a flower-pot, andplaced in a window-seat near his bed. And the flower had beenplanted by a fortunate hand, for it grew, put forth fresh shoots,and blossomed every year. It became a splendid flower-garden to thesick boy, and his little treasure upon earth. He watered it, andcherished it, and took care it should have the benefit of everysunbeam that found its way into the cellar, from the earliestmorning ray to the evening sunset. The flower entwined itself evenin his dreams- for him it bloomed, for him spread its perfume. Andit gladdened his eyes, and to the flower he turned, even in death,when the Lord called him. He has been one year with God. During thattime the flower has stood in the window, withered and forgotten,till at length cast out among the sweepings into the street, on theday of the lodgers' removal. And this poor flower, withered andfaded as it is, we have added to our nosegay, because it gave morereal joy than the most beautiful flower in the garden of a queen."

"But how do you know all this?" asked the child whom the angel wascarrying to heaven.

"I know it," said the angel, "because I myself was the poor sickboy who walked upon crutches, and I know my own flower well."

Then the child opened his eyes and looked into the glorioushappy face of the angel, and at the same moment they foundthemselves in that heavenly home where all is happiness and joy. AndGod pressed the dead child to His heart, and wings were given him sothat he could fly with the angel, hand in hand. Then the Almightypressed all the flowers to His heart; but He kissed the witheredfield-flower, and it received a voice. Then it joined in the song ofthe angels, who surrounded the throne, some near, and others in adistant circle, but all equally happy. They all joined in the chorusof praise, both great and small,- the good, happy child, and thepoor field-flower, that once lay withered and cast away on a heap ofrubbish in a narrow, dark street.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   THE BEETLE WHO WENT ON HIS TRAVELS

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once an Emperor who had a horse shod with gold. He had agolden shoe on each foot, and why was this? He was a beautifulcreature, with slender legs, bright, intelligent eyes, and a mane thathung down over his neck like a veil. He had carried his master throughfire and smoke in the battle-field, with the bullets whistling roundhim; he had kicked and bitten, and taken part in the fight, when theenemy advanced; and, with his master on his back, he had dashed overthe fallen foe, and saved the golden crown and the Emperor's life,which was of more value than the brightest gold. This is the reason ofthe Emperor's horse wearing golden shoes.

A beetle came creeping forth from the stable, where the farrierhad been shoeing the horse. "Great ones, first, of course," said he,"and then the little ones; but size is not always a proof ofgreatness." He stretched out his thin leg as he spoke.

"And pray what do you want?" asked the farrier.

"Golden shoes," replied the beetle.

"Why, you must be out of your senses," cried the farrier."Golden shoes for you, indeed!"

"Yes, certainly; golden shoes," replied the beetle. "Am I not justas good as that great creature yonder, who is waited upon and brushed,and has food and drink placed before him? And don't I belong to theroyal stables?"

"But why does the horse have golden shoes?" asked the farrier; "ofcourse you understand the reason?"

"Understand! Well, I understand that it is a personal slight tome," cried the beetle. "It is done to annoy me, so I intend to goout into the world and seek my fortune."

"Go along with you," said the farrier.

"You're a rude fellow," cried the beetle, as he walked out ofthe stable; and then he flew for a short distance, till he foundhimself in a beautiful flower-garden, all fragrant with roses andlavender. The lady-birds, with red and black shells on their backs,and delicate wings, were flying about, and one of them said, "Is itnot sweet and lovely here? Oh, how beautiful everything is."

"I am accustomed to better things," said the beetle. "Do youcall this beautiful? Why, there is not even a dung-heap." Then he wenton, and under the shadow of a large haystack he found a caterpillarcrawling along. "How beautiful this world is!" said the caterpillar."The sun is so warm, I quite enjoy it. And soon I shall go to sleep,and die as they call it, but I shall wake up with beautiful wings tofly with, like a butterfly."

"How conceited you are!" exclaimed the beetle. "Fly about as abutterfly, indeed! what of that. I have come out of the Emperor'sstable, and no one there, not even the Emperor's horse, who, infact, wears my cast-off golden shoes, has any idea of flying,excepting myself. To have wings and fly! why, I can do thatalready;" and so saying, he spread his wings and flew away. "I don'twant to be disgusted," he said to himself, "and yet I can't helpit." Soon after, he fell down upon an extensive lawn, and for a timepretended to sleep, but at last fell asleep in earnest. Suddenly aheavy shower of rain came falling from the clouds. The beetle wokeup with the noise and would have been glad to creep into the earth forshelter, but he could not. He was tumbled over and over with the rain,sometimes swimming on his stomach and sometimes on his back; and asfor flying, that was out of the question. He began to doubt whether heshould escape with his life, so he remained, quietly lying where hewas. After a while the weather cleared up a little, and the beetle wasable to rub the water from his eyes, and look about him. He sawsomething gleaming, and he managed to make his way up to it. It waslinen which had been laid to bleach on the grass. He crept into a foldof the damp linen, which certainly was not so comfortable a place tolie in as the warm stable, but there was nothing better, so heremained lying there for a whole day and night, and the rain kept onall the time. Towards morning he crept out of his hiding-place,feeling in a very bad temper with the climate. Two frogs weresitting on the linen, and their bright eyes actually glistened withpleasure.

"Wonderful weather this," cried one of them, "and so refreshing.This linen holds the water together so beautifully, that my hindlegs quiver as if I were going to swim."

"I should like to know," said another, "If the swallow who fliesso far in her many journeys to foreign lands, ever met with a betterclimate than this. What delicious moisture! It is as pleasant as lyingin a wet ditch. I am sure any one who does not enjoy this has nolove for his fatherland."

"Have you ever been in the Emperor's stable?" asked the beetle."There the moisture is warm and refreshing; that's the climate for me,but I could not take it with me on my travels. Is there not even adunghill here in this garden, where a person of rank, like myself,could take up his abode and feel at home?" But the frogs either didnot or would not understand him.

"I never ask a question twice," said the beetle, after he hadasked this one three times, and received no answer. Then he went ona little farther and stumbled against a piece of broken crockery-ware,which certainly ought not to have been lying there. But as it wasthere, it formed a good shelter against wind and weather to severalfamilies of earwigs who dwelt in it. Their requirements were not many,they were very sociable, and full of affection for their children,so much so that each mother considered her own child the mostbeautiful and clever of them all.

"Our dear son has engaged himself," said one mother, "dearinnocent boy; his greatest ambition is that he may one day creepinto a clergyman's ear. That is a very artless and loveable wish;and being engaged will keep him steady. What happiness for a mother!"

"Our son," said another, "had scarcely crept out of the egg,when he was off on his travels. He is all life and spirits, I expecthe will wear out his horns with running. How charming this is for amother, is it not Mr. Beetle?" for she knew the stranger by hishorny coat.

"You are both quite right," said he; so they begged him to walkin, that is to come as far as he could under the broken piece ofearthenware.

"Now you shall also see my little earwigs," said a third and afourth mother, "they are lovely little things, and highly amusing.They are never ill-behaved, except when they are uncomfortable intheir inside, which unfortunately often happens at their age."

Thus each mother spoke of her baby, and their babies talkedafter their own fashion, and made use of the little nippers theyhave in their tails to nip the beard of the beetle.

"They are always busy about something, the little rogues," saidthe mother, beaming with maternal pride; but the beetle felt it abore, and he therefore inquired the way to the nearest dung-heap.

"That is quite out in the great world, on the other side of theditch," answered an earwig, "I hope none of my children will ever goso far, it would be the death of me."

"But I shall try to get so far," said the beetle, and he walkedoff without taking any formal leave, which is considered a politething to do.

When he arrived at the ditch, he met several friends, all thembeetles; "We live here," they said, "and we are very comfortable.May we ask you to step down into this rich mud, you must be fatiguedafter your journey."

"Certainly," said the beetle, "I shall be most happy; I havebeen exposed to the rain, and have had to lie upon linen, andcleanliness is a thing that greatly exhausts me; I have also painsin one of my wings from standing in the draught under a piece ofbroken crockery. It is really quite refreshing to be with one's ownkindred again."

"Perhaps you came from a dung-heap," observed the oldest of them.

"No, indeed, I came from a much grander place," replied thebeetle; "I came from the emperor's stable, where I was born, withgolden shoes on my feet. I am travelling on a secret embassy, butyou must not ask me any questions, for I cannot betray my secret."

Then the beetle stepped down into the rich mud, where sat threeyoung-lady beetles, who tittered, because they did not know what tosay.

"None of them are engaged yet," said their mother, and thebeetle maidens tittered again, this time quite in confusion.

"I have never seen greater beauties, even in the royal stables,"exclaimed the beetle, who was now resting himself.

"Don't spoil my girls," said the mother; "and don't talk tothem, pray, unless you have serious intentions."

But of course the beetle's intentions were serious, and after awhile our friend was engaged. The mother gave them her blessing, andall the other beetles cried "hurrah."

Immediately after the betrothal came the marriage, for there wasno reason to delay. The following day passed very pleasantly, andthe next was tolerably comfortable; but on the third it becamenecessary for him to think of getting food for his wife, and, perhaps,for children.

"I have allowed myself to be taken in," said our beetle tohimself, "and now there's nothing to be done but to take them in, inreturn."

No sooner said than done. Away he went, and stayed away all dayand all night, and his wife remained behind a forsaken widow.

"Oh," said the other beetles, "this fellow that we have receivedinto our family is nothing but a complete vagabond. He has gone awayand left his wife a burden upon our hands."

"Well, she can be unmarried again, and remain here with my otherdaughters," said the mother. "Fie on the villain that forsook her!"

In the mean time the beetle, who had sailed across the ditch ona cabbage leaf, had been journeying on the other side. In themorning two persons came up to the ditch. When they saw him theytook him up and turned him over and over, looking very learned all thetime, especially one, who was a boy. "Allah sees the black beetle inthe black stone, and the black rock. Is not that written in theKoran?" he asked.

Then he translated the beetle's name into Latin, and said agreat deal upon the creature's nature and history. The secondperson, who was older and a scholar, proposed to carry the beetlehome, as they wanted just such good specimens as this. Our beetleconsidered this speech a great insult, so he flew suddenly out ofthe speaker's hand. His wings were dry now, so they carried him to agreat distance, till at last he reached a hothouse, where a sash ofthe glass roof was partly open, so he quietly slipped in and buriedhimself in the warm earth. "It is very comfortable here," he said tohimself, and soon after fell asleep. Then he dreamed that theemperor's horse was dying, and had left him his golden shoes, and alsopromised that he should have two more. All this was very delightful,and when the beetle woke up he crept forth and looked around him. Whata splendid place the hothouse was! At the back, large palm-treeswere growing; and the sunlight made the leaves- look quite glossy; andbeneath them what a profusion of luxuriant green, and of flowers redlike flame, yellow as amber, or white as new-fallen snow! "What awonderful quantity of plants," cried the beetle; "how good they willtaste when they are decayed! This is a capital store-room. Theremust certainly be some relations of mine living here; I will justsee if I can find any one with whom I can associate. I'm proud,certainly; but I'm also proud of being so. Then he prowled about inthe earth, and thought what a pleasant dream that was about thedying horse, and the golden shoes he had inherited. Suddenly a handseized the beetle, and squeezed him, and turned him round and round.The gardener's little son and his playfellow had come into thehothouse, and, seeing the beetle, wanted to have some fun with him.First, he was wrapped, in a vine-leaf, and put into a warm trousers'pocket. He twisted and turned about with all his might, but he got agood squeeze from the boy's hand, as a hint for him to keep quiet.Then the boy went quickly towards a lake that lay at the end of thegarden. Here the beetle was put into an old broken wooden shoe, inwhich a little stick had been fastened upright for a mast, and to thismast the beetle was bound with a piece of worsted. Now he was asailor, and had to sail away. The lake was not very large, but tothe beetle it seemed an ocean, and he was so astonished at its sizethat he fell over on his back, and kicked out his legs. Then thelittle ship sailed away; sometimes the current of the water seized it,but whenever it went too far from the shore one of the boys turnedup his trousers, and went in after it, and brought it back to land.But at last, just as it went merrily out again, the two boys werecalled, and so angrily, that they hastened to obey, and ran away asfast as they could from the pond, so that the little ship was leftto its fate. It was carried away farther and farther from the shore,till it reached the open sea. This was a terrible prospect for thebeetle, for he could not escape in consequence of being bound to themast. Then a fly came and paid him a visit. "What beautifulweather," said the fly; "I shall rest here and sun myself. You musthave a pleasant time of it."

"You speak without knowing the facts," replied the beetle;"don't you see that I am a prisoner?"

"Ah, but I'm not a prisoner," remarked the fly, and away he flew.

"Well, now I know the world," said the beetle to himself; "it's anabominable world; I'm the only respectable person in it. First, theyrefuse me my golden shoes; then I have to lie on damp linen, and tostand in a draught; and to crown all, they fasten a wife upon me.Then, when I have made a step forward in the world, and found out acomfortable position, just as I could wish it to be, one of thesehuman boys comes and ties me up, and leaves me to the mercy of thewild waves, while the emperor's favorite horse goes prancing aboutproudly on his golden shoes. This vexes me more than anything. Butit is useless to look for sympathy in this world. My career has beenvery interesting, but what's the use of that if nobody knowsanything about it? The world does not deserve to be made acquaintedwith my adventures, for it ought to have given me golden shoes whenthe emperor's horse was shod, and I stretched out my feet to beshod, too. If I had received golden shoes I should have been anornament to the stable; now I am lost to the stable and to theworld. It is all over with me."

But all was not yet over. A boat, in which were a few young girls,came rowing up. "Look, yonder is an old wooden shoe sailing along,"said one of the younger girls.

"And there's a poor little creature bound fast in it," saidanother.

The boat now came close to our beetle's ship, and the younggirls fished it out of the water. One of them drew a small pair ofscissors from her pocket, and cut the worsted without hurting thebeetle, and when she stepped on shore she placed him on the grass."There," she said, "creep away, or fly, if thou canst. It is asplendid thing to have thy liberty." Away flew the beetle, straightthrough the open window of a large building; there he sank down, tiredand exhausted, exactly on the mane of the emperor's favorite horse,who was standing in his stable; and the beetle found himself at homeagain. For some time he clung to the mane, that he might recoverhimself. "Well," he said, "here I am, seated on the emperor's favoritehorse,- sitting upon him as if I were the emperor himself. But whatwas it the farrier asked me? Ah, I remember now,- that's a goodthought,- he asked me why the golden shoes were given to the horse.The answer is quite clear to me, now. They were given to the horseon my account." And this reflection put the beetle into a good temper.The sun's rays also came streaming into the stable, and shone uponhim, and made the place lively and bright. "Travelling expands themind very much," said the beetle. "The world is not so bad afterall, if you know how to take things as they come.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

THE BELL

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IN the narrow streets of a large town people often heard in theevening, when the sun was setting, and his last rays gave a goldentint to the chimney-pots, a strange noise which resembled the sound ofa church bell; it only lasted an instant, for it was lost in thecontinual roar of traffic and hum of voices which rose from thetown. "The evening bell is ringing," people used to say; "the sun issetting!" Those who walked outside the town, where the houses wereless crowded and interspersed by gardens and little fields, saw theevening sky much better, and heard the sound of the bell much moreclearly. It seemed as though the sound came from a church, deep in thecalm, fragrant wood, and thither people looked with devout feelings.

A considerable time elapsed: one said to the other, "I reallywonder if there is a church out in the wood. The bell has indeed astrange sweet sound! Shall we go there and see what the cause of itis?" The rich drove, the poor walked, but the way seemed to themextraordinarily long, and when they arrived at a number of willowtrees on the border of the wood they sat down, looked up into thegreat branches and thought they were now really in the wood. Aconfectioner from the town also came out and put up a stall there;then came another confectioner who hung a bell over his stall, whichwas covered with pitch to protect it from the rain, but the clapperwas wanting.

When people came home they used to say that it had been veryromantic, and that really means something else than merely taking tea.Three persons declared that they had gone as far as the end of thewood; they had always heard the strange sound, but there it seemedto them as if it came from the town. One of them wrote verses aboutthe bell, and said that it was like the voice of a mother speakingto an intelligent and beloved child; no tune, he said, was sweeterthan the sound of the bell.

The emperor of the country heard of it, and declared that he whowould really find out where the sound came from should receive thetitle of "Bellringer to the World," even if there was no bell at all.

Now many went out into the wood for the sake of this splendidberth; but only one of them came back with some sort of explanation.None of them had gone far enough, nor had he, and yet he said that thesound of the bell came from a large owl in a hollow tree. It was awisdom owl, which continually knocked its head against the tree, buthe was unable to say with certainty whether its head or the hollowtrunk of the tree was the cause of the noise.

He was appointed "Bellringer to the World," and wrote every year ashort dissertation on the owl, but by this means people did not becomeany wiser than they had been before.

It was just confirmation-day. The clergyman had delivered abeautiful and touching sermon, the candidates were deeply moved by it;it was indeed a very important day for them; they were all at oncetransformed from mere children to grown-up people; the childish soulwas to fly over, as it were, into a more reasonable being.

The sun shone most brightly; and the sound of the great unknownbell was heard more distinctly than ever. They had a mind to gothither, all except three. One of them wished to go home and try onher ball dress, for this very dress and the ball were the cause of herbeing confirmed this time, otherwise she would not have been allowedto go. The second, a poor boy, had borrowed a coat and a pair of bootsfrom the son of his landlord to be confirmed in, and he had toreturn them at a certain time. The third said that he never wentinto strange places if his parents were not with him; he had alwaysbeen a good child, and wished to remain so, even after beingconfirmed, and they ought not to tease him for this; they, however,did it all the same. These three, therefore did not go; the otherswent on. The sun was shining, the birds were singing, and theconfirmed children sang too, holding each other by the hand, forthey had no position yet, and they were all equal in the eyes ofGod. Two of the smallest soon became tired and returned to the town;two little girls sat down and made garlands of flowers, they,therefore, did not go on. When the others arrived at the willow trees,where the confectioner had put up his stall, they said: "Now we areout here; the bell does not in reality exist- it is only somethingthat people imagine!"

Then suddenly the sound of the bell was heard so beautifully andsolemnly from the wood that four or five made up their minds to gostill further on. The wood was very thickly grown. It was difficult toadvance: wood lilies and anemones grew almost too high; floweringconvolvuli and brambles were hanging like garlands from tree totree; while the nightingales were singing and the sunbeams played.That was very beautiful! But the way was unfit for the girls; theywould have torn their dresses. Large rocks, covered with moss ofvarious hues, were lying about; the fresh spring water rippled forthwith a peculiar sound. "I don't think that can be the bell," saidone of the confirmed children, and then he lay down and listened."We must try to find out if it is!" And there he remained, and let theothers walk on.

They came to a hut built of the bark of trees and branches; alarge crab-apple tree spread its branches over it, as if it intendedto pour all its fruit on the roof, upon which roses were blooming; thelong boughs covered the gable, where a little bell was hanging. Wasthis the one they had heard? All agreed that it must be so, except onewho said that the bell was too small and too thin to be heard atsuch a distance, and that it had quite a different sound to that whichhad so touched men's hearts.

He who spoke was a king's son, and therefore the others saidthat such a one always wishes to be cleverer than other people.

Therefore they let him go alone; and as he walked on, the solitudeof the wood produced a feeling of reverence in his breast; but stillhe heard the little bell about which the others rejoiced, andsometimes, when the wind blew in that direction, he could hear thesounds from the confectioner's stall, where the others were singing attea. But the deep sounds of the bell were much stronger; soon itseemed to him as if an organ played an accompaniment- the sound camefrom the left, from the side where the heart is. Now something rustledamong the bushes, and a little boy stood before the king's son, inwooden shoes and such a short jacket that the sleeves did not reach tohis wrists. They knew each other: the boy was the one who had not beenable to go with them because he had to take the coat and boots back tohis landlord's son. That he had done, and had started again in hiswooden shoes and old clothes, for the sound of the bell was tooenticing- he felt he must go on.

"We might go together," said the king's son. But the poor boy withthe wooden shoes was quite ashamed; he pulled at the short sleevesof his jacket, and said that he was afraid he could not walk sofast; besides, he was of opinion that the bell ought to be sought atthe right, for there was all that was grand and magnificent.

"Then we shall not meet," said the king's son, nodding to the poorboy, who went into the deepest part of the wood, where the thorns torehis shabby clothes and scratched his hands, face, and feet untilthey bled. The king's son also received several good scratches, butthe sun was shining on his way, and it is he whom we will nowfollow, for he was a quick fellow. "I will and must find the bell," hesaid, "if I have to go to the end of the world."

Ugly monkeys sat high in the branches and clenched their teeth."Shall we beat him?" they said. "Shall we thrash him? He is a king'sson!"

But he walked on undaunted, deeper and deeper into the wood, wherethe most wonderful flowers were growing; there were standing whitestar lilies with blood-red stamens, sky-blue tulips shining when thewind moved them; apple-trees covered with apples like large glitteringsoap bubbles: only think how resplendent these trees were in thesunshine! All around were beautiful green meadows, where hart and hindplayed in the grass. There grew magnificent oaks and beech-trees;and if the bark was split of any of them, long blades of grass grewout of the clefts; there were also large smooth lakes in the wood,on which the swans were swimming about and flapping their wings. Theking's son often stood still and listened; sometimes he thought thatthe sound of the bell rose up to him out of one of these deep lakes,but soon he found that this was a mistake, and that the bell wasringing still farther in the wood. Then the sun set, the clouds wereas red as fire; it became quiet in the wood; he sank down on hisknees, sang an evening hymn and said: "I shall never find what I amlooking for! Now the sun is setting, and the night, the dark night, isapproaching. Yet I may perhaps see the round sun once more before hedisappears beneath the horizon. I will climb up these rocks, theyare as high as the highest trees!" And then, taking hold of thecreepers and roots, he climbed up on the wet stones, wherewater-snakes were wriggling and the toads, as it were, barked athim: he reached the top before the sun, seen from such a height, hadquite set. "Oh, what a splendour!" The sea, the great majestic sea,which was rolling its long waves against the shore, stretched outbefore him, and the sun was standing like a large bright altar andthere where sea and heaven met- all melted together in the mostglowing colours; the wood was singing, and his heart too. The whole ofnature was one large holy church, in which the trees and hoveringclouds formed the pillars, the flowers and grass the woven velvetcarpet, and heaven itself was the great cupola; up there the flamecolour vanished as soon as the sun disappeared, but millions ofstars were lighted; diamond lamps were shining, and the king's sonstretched his arms out towards heaven, towards the sea, and towardsthe wood. Then suddenly the poor boy with the short-sleeved jacket andthe wooden shoes appeared; he had arrived just as quickly on theroad he had chosen. And they ran towards each other and took oneanother's hand, in the great cathedral of nature and poesy, andabove them sounded the invisible holy bell; happy spirits surroundedthem, singing hallelujahs and rejoicing.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE BELL-DEEP

   by Hans Christian Andersen

"DING-DONG! ding-dong!" It sounds up from the "bell-deep" in theOdense-Au. Every child in the old town of Odense, on the island ofFunen, knows the Au, which washes the gardens round about the town,and flows on under the wooden bridges from the dam to thewater-mill. In the Au grow the yellow water-lilies and brownfeathery reeds; the dark velvety flag grows there, high and thick; oldand decayed willows, slanting and tottering, hang far out over thestream beside the monk's meadow and by the bleaching ground; butopposite there are gardens upon gardens, each different from the rest,some with pretty flowers and bowers like little dolls' pleasuregrounds, often displaying cabbage and other kitchen plants; and hereand there the gardens cannot be seen at all, for the great elder treesthat spread themselves out by the bank, and hang far out over thestreaming waters, which are deeper here and there than an oar canfathom. Opposite the old nunnery is the deepest place, which is calledthe "bell-deep," and there dwells the old water spirit, the "Au-mann."This spirit sleeps through the day while the sun shines down uponthe water; but in starry and moonlit nights he shows himself. He isvery old. Grandmother says that she has heard her own grandmother tellof him; he is said to lead a solitary life, and to have nobody withwhom he can converse save the great old church Bell. Once the Bellhung in the church tower; but now there is no trace left of thetower or of the church, which was called St. Alban's.

"Ding-dong! ding-dong!" sounded the Bell, when the tower stillstood there; and one evening, while the sun was setting, and theBell was swinging away bravely, it broke loose and came flying downthrough the air, the brilliant metal shining in the ruddy beam.

"Ding-dong! ding-dong! Now I'll retire to rest!" sang the Bell,and flew down into the Odense-Au, where it is deepest; and that is whythe place is called the "bell-deep."

But the Bell got neither rest nor sleep. Down in the Au-mann'shaunt it sounds and rings, so that the tones sometimes pierce upwardthrough the waters; and many people maintain that its strains forebodethe death of some one; but that is not true, for the Bell is onlytalking with the Au-mann, who is now no longer alone.

And what is the Bell telling? It is old, very old, as we havealready observed; it was there long before grandmother's grandmotherwas born; and yet it is but a child in comparison with the Au-mann,who is quite an old quiet personage, an oddity, with his hose ofeel-skin, and his scaly Jacket with the yellow lilies for buttons, anda wreath of reed in his hair and seaweed in his beard; but he looksvery pretty for all that.

What the Bell tells? To repeat it all would require years anddays; for year by year it is telling the old stories, sometimesshort ones, sometimes long ones, according to its whim; it tells ofold times, of the dark hard times, thus:

"In the church of St. Alban, the monk had mounted up into thetower. He was young and handsome, but thoughtful exceedingly. Helooked through the loophole out upon the Odense-Au, when the bed ofthe water was yet broad, and the monks' meadow was still a lake. Helooked out over it, and over the rampart, and over the nuns' hillopposite, where the convent lay, and the light gleamed forth fromthe nun's cell. He had known the nun right well, and he thought ofher, and his heart beat quicker as he thought. Ding-dong! ding-dong!"

Yes, this was the story the Bell told.

"Into the tower came also the dapper man-servant of the bishop;and when I, the Bell, who am made of metal, rang hard and loud, andswung to and fro, I might have beaten out his brains. He sat downclose under me, and played with two little sticks as if they hadbeen a stringed instrument; and he sang to it. 'Now I may sing itout aloud, though at other times I may not whisper it. I may sing ofeverything that is kept concealed behind lock and bars. Yonder it iscold and wet. The rats are eating her up alive! Nobody knows of it!Nobody hears of it! Not even now, for the bell is ringing andsinging its loud Ding-dong, ding-dong!'

"There was a King in those days. They called him Canute. Hebowed himself before bishop and monk; but when he offended the freepeasants with heavy taxes and hard words, they seized their weaponsand put him to flight like a wild beast. He sought shelter in thechurch, and shut gate and door behind him. The violent band surroundedthe church; I heard tell of it. The crows, ravens and magpiesstarted up in terror at the yelling and shouting that soundedaround. They flew into the tower and out again, they looked downupon the throng below, and they also looked into the windows of thechurch, and screamed out aloud what they saw there. King Canuteknelt before the altar in prayer; his brothers Eric and Benedict stoodby him as a guard with drawn swords; but the King's servant, thetreacherous Blake, betrayed his master. The throng in front of thechurch knew where they could hit the King, and one of them flung astone through a pane of glass, and the King lay there dead! Thecries and screams of the savage horde and of the birds sounded throughthe air, and I joined in it also; for I sang 'Ding-dong! ding-dong!'

"The church bell hangs high, and looks far around, and sees thebirds around it, and understands their language. The wind roars inupon it through windows and loopholes; and the wind knowseverything, for he gets it from the air, which encircles all things,and the church bell understands his tongue, and rings it out intothe world, 'Ding-dong! ding-dong!'

"But it was too much for me to hear and to know; I was not ableany longer to ring it out. I became so tired, so heavy, that thebeam broke, and I flew out into the gleaming Au, where the water isdeepest, and where the Au-mann lives, solitary and alone; and yearby year I tell him what I have heard and what I know. Ding-dong!ding-dong"

Thus it sounds complainingly out of the bell-deep in theOdense-Au. That is what grandmother told us.

But the schoolmaster says that there was not any bell that rungdown there, for that it could not do so; and that no Au-mann dweltyonder, for there was no Au-mann at all! And when all the other churchbells are sounding sweetly, he says that it is not really the bellsthat are sounding, but that it is the air itself which sends forth thenotes; and grandmother said to us that the Bell itself said it was theair who told it to him, consequently they are agreed on that point,and this much is sure.

"Be cautious, cautious, and take good heed to thyself," theyboth say.

The air knows everything. It is around us, it is in us, it talksof our thoughts and of our deeds, and it speaks longer of them thandoes the Bell down in the depths of the Odense-Au where the Au-manndwells. It rings it out in the vault of heaven, far, far out,forever and ever, till the heaven bells sound "Ding-dong! ding-dong!"

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

THE BIRD OF POPULAR SONG

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IT is winter-time. The earth wears a snowy garment, and looks likemarble hewn out of the rock; the air is bright and clear; the windis sharp as a well-tempered sword, and the trees stand like branchesof white coral or blooming almond twigs, and here it is keen as on thelofty Alps.

The night is splendid in the gleam of the Northern Lights, andin the glitter of innumerable twinkling stars.

But we sit in the warm room, by the hot stove, and talk aboutthe old times. And we listen to this story:

By the open sea was a giant's grave; and on the grave-mound sat atmidnight the spirit of the buried hero, who had been a king. Thegolden circlet gleamed on his brow, his hair fluttered in the wind,and he was clad in steel and iron. He bent his head mournfully, andsighed in deep sorrow, as an unquiet spirit might sigh.

And a ship came sailing by. Presently the sailors lowered theanchor and landed. Among them was a singer, and he approached theroyal spirit, and said,

"Why mournest thou, and wherefore dost thou suffer thus?"

And the dead man answered,

"No one has sung the deeds of my life; they are dead andforgotten. Song doth not carry them forth over the lands, nor into thehearts of men; therefore I have no rest and no peace."

And he spoke of his works, and of his warlike deeds, which hiscontemporaries had known, but which had not been sung, because therewas no singer among his companions.

Then the old bard struck the strings of his harp, and sang ofthe youthful courage of the hero, of the strength of the man, and ofthe greatness of his good deeds. Then the face of the dead one gleamedlike the margin of the cloud in the moonlight. Gladly and of goodcourage, the form arose in splendor and in majesty, and vanishedlike the glancing of the northern light. Nought was to be seen but thegreen turfy mound, with the stones on which no Runic record has beengraven; but at the last sound of the harp there soared over thehill, as though he had fluttered from the harp, a little bird, acharming singing-bird, with ringing voice of the thrush, with themoving voice pathos of the human heart, with a voice that told ofhome, like the voice that is heard by the bird of passage. Thesinging-bird soared away, over mountain and valley, over field andwood- he was the Bird of Popular Song, who never dies.

We hear his song- we hear it now in the room while the whitebees are swarming without, and the storm clutches the windows. Thebird sings not alone the requiem of heroes; he sings also sweet gentlesongs of love, so many and so warm, of Northern fidelity and truth. Hehas stories in words and in tones; he has proverbs and snatches ofproverbs; songs which, like Runes laid under a dead man's tongue,force him to speak; and thus Popular Song tells of the land of hisbirth.

In the old heathen days, in the times of the Vikings, thepopular speech was enshrined in the harp of the bard.

In the days of knightly castles, when the strongest fist heldthe scales of justice, when only might was right, and a peasant anda dog were of equal importance, where did the Bird of Song findshelter and protection? Neither violence nor stupidity gave him athought.

But in the gabled window of the knightly castle, the lady of thecastle sat with the parchment roll before her, and wrote down theold recollections in song and legend, while near her stood the oldwoman from the wood, and the travelling peddler who went wanderingthrough the country. As these told their tales, there fluttered aroundthem, with twittering and song, the Bird of Popular Song, who neverdies so long as the earth has a hill upon which his foot may rest.

And now he looks in upon us and sings. Without are the night andthe snow-storm. He lays the Runes beneath our tongues, and we know theland of our home. Heaven speaks to us in our native tongue, in thevoice of the Bird of Popular Song. The old remembrances awake, thefaded colors glow with a fresh lustre, and story and song pour us ablessed draught which lifts up our minds and our thoughts, so that theevening becomes as a Christmas festival.

The snow-flakes chase each other, the ice cracks, the stormrules without, for he has the might, he is lord- but not the LORD OFALL.

It is winter time. The wind is sharp as a two-edged sword, thesnow-flakes chase each other; it seems as though it had been snowingfor days and weeks, and the snow lies like a great mountain over thewhole town, like a heavy dream of the winter night. Everything onthe earth is hidden away, only the golden cross of the church, thesymbol of faith, arises over the snow grave, and gleams in the blueair and in the bright sunshine.

And over the buried town fly the birds of heaven, the small andthe great; they twitter and they sing as best they may, each bird withhis beak.

First comes the band of sparrows: they pipe at every trifle in thestreets and lanes, in the nests and the houses; they have stories totell about the front buildings and the back buildings.

"We know the buried town," they say; "everything living in it ispiep! piep! piep!"

The black ravens and crows flew on over the white snow.

"Grub, grub!" they cried. "There's something to be got down there;something to swallow, and that's most important. That's the opinion ofmost of them down there, and the opinion is goo-goo-good!"

The wild swans come flying on whirring pinions, and sing of thenoble and the great, that will still sprout in the hearts of men, downin the town which is resting beneath its snowy veil.

No death is there- life reigns yonder; we hear it on the notesthat swell onward like the tones of the church organ, which seize uslike sounds from the elf-hill, like the songs of Ossian, like therushing swoop of the wandering spirits' wings. What harmony! Thatharmony speaks to our hearts, and lifts up our souls! It is the Birdof Popular Song whom we hear.

And at this moment the warm breath of heaven blows down from thesky. There are gaps in the snowy mountains, the sun shines into theclefts; spring is coming, the birds are returning, and new races arecoming with the same home sounds in their hearts.

Hear the story of the year: "The night of the snow-storm, theheavy dream of the winter night, all shall be dissolved, all shallrise again in the beauteous notes of the Bird of Popular Song, whonever dies!"

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE BISHOP OF BORGLUM AND HIS WARRIORS

   by Hans Christian Andersen

OUR scene is laid in Northern Jutland, in the so-called "wildmoor." We hear what is called the "Wester-wow-wow"- the peculiarroar of the North Sea as it breaks against the western coast ofJutland. It rolls and thunders with a sound that penetrates formiles into the land; and we are quite near the roaring. Before usrises a great mound of sand- a mountain we have long seen, and towardswhich we are wending our way, driving slowly along through the deepsand. On this mountain of sand is a lofty old building- the convent ofBorglum. In one of its wings (the larger one) there is still a church.And at this convent we now arrive in the late evening hour; but theweather is clear in the bright June night around us, and the eye canrange far, far over field and moor to the Bay of Aalborg, over heathand meadow, and far across the deep blue sea.

Now we are there, and roll past between barns and other farmbuildings; and at the left of the gate we turn aside to the Old CastleFarm, where the lime trees stand in lines along the walls, and,sheltered from the wind and weather, grow so luxuriantly that theirtwigs and leaves almost conceal the windows.

We mount the winding staircase of stone, and march through thelong passages under the heavy roof-beams. The wind moans verystrangely here, both within and without. It is hardly known how, butthe people say- yes, people say a great many things when they arefrightened or want to frighten others- they say that the old deadchoir-men glide silently past us into the church, where mass issung. They can be heard in the rushing of the storm, and their singingbrings up strange thoughts in the hearers- thoughts of the old timesinto which we are carried back.

On the coast a ship is stranded; and the bishop's warriors arethere, and spare not those whom the sea has spared. The sea washesaway the blood that has flowed from the cloven skulls. The strandedgoods belong to the bishop, and there is a store of goods here. Thesea casts up tubs and barrels filled with costly wine for theconvent cellar, and in the convent is already good store of beer andmead. There is plenty in the kitchen- dead game and poultry, hamsand sausages; and fat fish swim in the ponds without.

The Bishop of Borglum is a mighty lord. He has greatpossessions, but still he longs for more- everything must bow beforethe mighty Olaf Glob. His rich cousin at Thyland is dead, and hiswidow is to have the rich inheritance. But how comes it that onerelation is always harder towards another than even strangers wouldbe? The widow's husband had possessed all Thyland, with theexception of the church property. Her son was not at home. In hisboyhood he had already started on a journey, for his desire was to seeforeign lands and strange people. For years there had been no newsof him. Perhaps he had been long laid in the grave, and would nevercome back to his home, to rule where his mother then ruled.

"What has a woman to do with rule?" said the bishop.

He summoned the widow before a law court; but what did he gainthereby? The widow had never been disobedient to the law, and wasstrong in her just rights.

Bishop Olaf of Borglum, what dost thou purpose? What writestthou on yonder smooth parchment, sealing it with thy seal, andintrusting it to the horsemen and servants, who ride away, far away,to the city of the Pope?

It is the time of falling leaves and of stranded ships, and soonicy winter will come.

Twice had icy winter returned before the bishop welcomed thehorsemen and servants back to their home. They came from Rome with apapal decree- a ban, or bull, against the widow who had dared tooffend the pious bishop. "Cursed be she and all that belongs to her.Let her be expelled from the congregation and the Church. Let no manstretch forth a helping hand to her, and let friends and relationsavoid her as a plague and a pestilence!"

"What will not bend must break," said the Bishop of Borglum

And all forsake the widow; but she holds fast to her God. He isher helper and defender.

One servant only- an old maid- remained faithful to her; andwith the old servant, the widow herself followed the plough; and thecrop grew, although the land had been cursed by the Pope and by thebishop.

"Thou child of perdition, I will yet carry out my purpose!"cried the Bishop of Borglum. "Now will I lay the hand of the Pope uponthee, to summon thee before the tribunal that shall condemn thee!"

Then did the widow yoke the last two oxen that remained to herto a wagon, and mounted up on the wagon, with her old servant, andtravelled away across the heath out of the Danish land. As astranger she came into a foreign country, where a strange tongue wasspoken and where new customs prevailed. Farther and farther shejourneyed, to where green hills rise into mountains, and the vineclothes their sides. Strange merchants drive by her, and they lookanxiously after their wagons laden with merchandise. They fear anattack from the armed followers of the robber-knights. The two poorwomen, in their humble vehicle drawn by two black oxen, travelfearlessly through the dangerous sunken road and through thedarksome forest. And now they were in Franconia. And there met thema stalwart knight, with a train of twelve armed followers. Hepaused, gazed at the strange vehicle, and questioned the women as tothe goal of their journey and the place whence they came. Then oneof them mentioned Thyland in Denmark, and spoke of her sorrows, of herwoes, which were soon to cease, for so Divine Providence had willedit. For the stranger knight is the widow's son! He seized her hand, heembraced her, and the mother wept. For years she had not been ableto weep, but had only bitten her lips till the blood started.

It is the time of falling leaves and of stranded ships, and soonwill icy winter come.

The sea rolled wine-tubs to the shore for the bishop's cellar.In the kitchen the deer roasted on the spit before the fire. AtBorglum it was warm and cheerful in the heated rooms, while coldwinter raged without, when a piece of news was brought to thebishop. "Jens Glob, of Thyland, has come back, and his mother withhim." Jens Glob laid a complaint against the bishop, and summonedhim before the temporal and the spiritual court.

"That will avail him little," said the bishop. "Best leave off thyefforts, knight Jens."

Again it is the time of falling leaves and stranded ships. Icywinter comes again, and the "white bees" are swarming, and sting thetraveller's face till they melt.

"Keen weather to-day!" say the people, as they step in.

Jens Glob stands so deeply wrapped in thought, that he singesthe skirt of his wide garment.

"Thou Borglum bishop," he exclaims, "I shall subdue thee afterall! Under the shield of the Pope, the law cannot reach thee; but JensGlob shall reach thee!"

Then he writes a letter to his brother-in-law, Olaf Hase, inSallingland, and prays that knight to meet him on Christmas eve, atmass, in the church at Widberg. The bishop himself is to read themass, and consequently will journey from Borglum to Thyland; andthis is known to Jens Glob.

Moorland and meadow are covered with ice and snow. The marshwill bear horse and rider, the bishop with his priests and armedmen. They ride the shortest way, through the waving reeds, where thewind moans sadly.

Blow thy brazen trumpet, thou trumpeter clad in fox-skin! itsounds merrily in the clear air. So they ride on over heath andmoorland- over what is the garden of Fata Morgana in the hot summer,though now icy, like all the country- towards the church of Widberg.

The wind is blowing his trumpet too- blowing it harder and harder.He blows up a storm- a terrible storm- that increases more and more.Towards the church they ride, as fast as they may through the storm.The church stands firm, but the storm careers on over field andmoorland, over land and sea.

Borglum's bishop reaches the church; but Olaf Hase will scarcedo so, however hard he may ride. He journeys with his warriors onthe farther side of the bay, in order that he may help Jens Glob,now that the bishop is to be summoned before the judgment seat ofthe Highest.

The church is the judgment hall; the altar is the council table.The lights burn clear in the heavy brass candelabra. The storm readsout the accusation and the sentence, roaming in the air over moorand heath, and over the rolling waters. No ferry-boat can sail overthe bay in such weather as this.

Olaf Hase makes halt at Ottesworde. There he dismisses hiswarriors, presents them with their horses and harness, and givesthem leave to ride home and greet his wife. He intends to risk hislife alone in the roaring waters; but they are to bear witness for himthat it is not his fault if Jens Glob stands without reinforcementin the church at Widberg. The faithful warriors will not leave him,but follow him out into the deep waters. Ten of them are carried away;but Olaf Hase and two of the youngest men reach the farther side. Theyhave still four miles to ride.

It is past midnight. It is Christmas. The wind has abated. Thechurch is lighted up; the gleaming radiance shines through thewindow-frames, and pours out over meadow and heath. The mass haslong been finished, silence reigns in the church, and the wax is hearddropping from the candles to the stone pavement. And now Olaf Hasearrives.

In the forecourt Jens Glob greets him kindly, and says,

"I have just made an agreement with the bishop."

"Sayest thou so?" replied Olaf Hase. "Then neither thou nor thebishop shall quit this church alive."

And the sword leaps from the scabbard, and Olaf Hase deals ablow that makes the panel of the church door, which Jens Globhastily closes between them, fly in fragments.

"Hold, brother! First hear what the agreement was that I made. Ihave slain the bishop and his warriors and priests. They will haveno word more to say in the matter, nor will I speak again of all thewrong that my mother has endured."

The long wicks of the altar lights glimmer red; but there is aredder gleam upon the pavement, where the bishop lies with clovenskull, and his dead warriors around him, in the quiet of the holyChristmas night.

And four days afterwards the bells toll for a funeral in theconvent of Borglum. The murdered bishop and the slain warriors andpriests are displayed under a black canopy, surrounded by candelabradecked with crape. There lies the dead man, in the black cloak wroughtwith silver; the crozier in the powerless hand that was once somighty. The incense rises in clouds, and the monks chant the funeralhymn. It sounds like a wail- it sounds like a sentence of wrath andcondemnation, that must be heard far over the land, carried by thewind- sung by the wind- the wail that sometimes is silent, but neverdies; for ever again it rises in song, singing even into our owntime this legend of the Bishop of Borglum and his hard nephew. It isheard in the dark night by the frightened husbandman, driving by inthe heavy sandy road past the convent of Borglum. It is heard by thesleepless listener in the thickly-walled rooms at Borglum. And notonly to the ear of superstition is the sighing and the tread ofhurrying feet audible in the long echoing passages leading to theconvent door that has long been locked. The door still seems toopen, and the lights seem to flame in the brazen candlesticks; thefragrance of incense arises; the church gleams in its ancientsplendor; and the monks sing and say the mass over the slain bishop,who lies there in the black silver-embroidered mantle, with thecrozier in his powerless hand; and on his pale proud forehead gleamsthe red wound like fire, and there burn the worldly mind and thewicked thoughts.

Sink down into his grave- into oblivion- ye terrible shapes of thetimes of old!

Hark to the raging of the angry wind, sounding above the rollingsea! A storm approaches without, calling aloud for human lives. Thesea has not put on a new mind with the new time. This night it is ahorrible pit to devour up lives, and to-morrow, perhaps, it may be aglassy mirror- even as in the old time that we have buried. Sleepsweetly, if thou canst sleep!

Now it is morning.

The new time flings sunshine into the room. The wind still keepsup mightily. A wreck is announced- as in the old time.

During the night, down yonder by Lokken, the little fishingvillage with the red-tiled roofs- we can see it up here from thewindow- a ship has come ashore. It has struck, and is fast embedded inthe sand; but the rocket apparatus has thrown a rope on board, andformed a bridge from the wreck to the mainland; and all on board aresaved, and reach the land, and are wrapped in warm blankets; andto-day they are invited to the farm at the convent of Borglum. Incomfortable rooms they encounter hospitality and friendly faces.They are addressed in the language of their country, and the pianosounds for them with melodies of their native land; and before thesehave died away, the chord has been struck, the wire of thought thatreaches to the land of the sufferers announces that they arerescued. Then their anxieties are dispelled; and at even they joinin the dance at the feast given in the great hall at Borglum.Waltzes and Styrian dances are given, and Danish popular songs, andmelodies of foreign lands in these modern times.

Blessed be thou, new time! Speak thou of summer and of purergales! Send thy sunbeams gleaming into our hearts and thoughts! On thyglowing canvas let them be painted- the dark legends of the rough hardtimes that are past!

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

THE BOTTLE NECK

   by Hans Christian Andersen

CLOSE to the corner of a street, among other abodes of poverty,stood an exceedingly tall, narrow house, which had been so knockedabout by time that it seemed out of joint in every direction. Thishouse was inhabited by poor people, but the deepest poverty wasapparent in the garret lodging in the gable. In front of the littlewindow, an old bent bird-cage hung in the sunshine, which had not evena proper water-glass, but instead of it the broken neck of a bottle,turned upside down, and a cork stuck in to make it hold the water withwhich it was filled. An old maid stood at the window; she had hungchickweed over the cage, and the little linnet which it containedhopped from perch to perch and sang and twittered merrily.

"Yes, it's all very well for you to sing," said the bottle neck:that is, he did not really speak the words as we do, for the neck of abottle cannot speak; but he thought them to himself in his own mind,just as people sometimes talk quietly to themselves.

"Yes, you may sing very well, you have all your limbs uninjured;you should feel what it is like to lose your body, and only have aneck and a mouth left, with a cork stuck in it, as I have: youwouldn't sing then, I know. After all, it is just as well that thereare some who can be happy. I have no reason to sing, nor could Ising now if I were ever so happy; but when I was a whole bottle, andthey rubbed me with a cork, didn't I sing then? I used to be calleda complete lark. I remember when I went out to a picnic with thefurrier's family, on the day his daughter was betrothed,- it seemsas if it only happened yesterday. I have gone through a great dealin my time, when I come to recollect: I have been in the fire and inthe water, I have been deep in the earth, and have mounted higher inthe air than most other people, and now I am swinging here, outsidea bird-cage, in the air and the sunshine. Oh, indeed, it would beworth while to hear my history; but I do not speak it aloud, for agood reason- because I cannot."

Then the bottle neck related his history, which was reallyrather remarkable; he, in fact, related it to himself, or, at least,thought it in his own mind. The little bird sang his own song merrily;in the street below there was driving and running to and fro, everyone thought of his own affairs, or perhaps of nothing at all; butthe bottle neck thought deeply. He thought of the blazing furnace inthe factory, where he had been blown into life; he remembered howhot it felt when he was placed in the heated oven, the home from whichhe sprang, and that he had a strong inclination to leap out againdirectly; but after a while it became cooler, and he found himselfvery comfortable. He had been placed in a row, with a whole regimentof his brothers and sisters all brought out of the same furnace;some of them had certainly been blown into champagne bottles, andothers into beer bottles, which made a little difference between them.In the world it often happens that a beer bottle may contain themost precious wine, and a champagne bottle be filled with blacking,but even in decay it may always be seen whether a man has been wellborn. Nobility remains noble, as a champagne bottle remains thesame, even with blacking in its interior. When the bottles were packedour bottle was packed amongst them; it little expected then tofinish its career as a bottle neck, or to be used as a water-glassto a bird's-cage, which is, after all, a place of honor, for it isto be of some use in the world. The bottle did not behold the light ofday again, until it was unpacked with the rest in the winemerchant's cellar, and, for the first time, rinsed with water, whichcaused some very curious sensations. There it lay empty, and without acork, and it had a peculiar feeling, as if it wanted something it knewnot what. At last it was filled with rich and costly wine, a corkwas placed in it, and sealed down. Then it was labelled "firstquality," as if it had carried off the first prize at anexamination; besides, the wine and the bottle were both good, andwhile we are young is the time for poetry. There were sounds of songwithin the bottle, of things it could not understand, of green sunnymountains, where the vines grow and where the merry vine-dresserslaugh, sing, and are merry. "Ah, how beautiful is life." All thesetones of joy and song in the bottle were like the working of a youngpoet's brain, who often knows not the meaning of the tones which aresounding within him. One morning the bottle found a purchaser in thefurrier's apprentice, who was told to bring one of the best bottles ofwine. It was placed in the provision basket with ham and cheese andsausages. The sweetest fresh butter and the finest bread were put intothe basket by the furrier's daughter herself, for she packed it. Shewas young and pretty; her brown eyes laughed, and a smile lingeredround her mouth as sweet as that in her eyes. She had delicatehands, beautifully white, and her neck was whiter still. It couldeasily be seen that she was a very lovely girl, and as yet she was notengaged. The provision basket lay in the lap of the young girl asthe family drove out to the forest, and the neck of the bottlepeeped out from between the folds of the white napkin. There was thered wax on the cork, and the bottle looked straight at the younggirl's face, and also at the face of the young sailor who sat nearher. He was a young friend, the son of a portrait painter. He hadlately passed his examination with honor, as mate, and the nextmorning he was to sail in his ship to a distant coast. There hadbeen a great deal of talk on this subject while the basket was beingpacked, and during this conversation the eyes and the mouth of thefurrier's daughter did not wear a very joyful expression. The youngpeople wandered away into the green wood, and talked together. Whatdid they talk about? The bottle could not say, for he was in theprovision basket. It remained there a long time; but when at last itwas brought forth it appeared as if something pleasant had happened,for every one was laughing; the furrier's daughter laughed too, butshe said very little, and her cheeks were like two roses. Then herfather took the bottle and the cork-screw into his hands. What astrange sensation it was to have the cork drawn for the first time!The bottle could never after that forget the performance of thatmoment; indeed there was quite a convulsion within him as the corkflew out, and a gurgling sound as the wine was poured forth into theglasses.

"Long life to the betrothed," cried the papa, and every glasswas emptied to the dregs, while the young sailor kissed hisbeautiful bride.

"Happiness and blessing to you both," said the old people-fatherand mother, and the young man filled the glasses again.

"Safe return, and a wedding this day next year," he cried; andwhen the glasses were empty he took the bottle, raised it on high, andsaid, "Thou hast been present here on the happiest day of my life;thou shalt never be used by others!" So saying, he hurled it high inthe air.

The furrier's daughter thought she should never see it again,but she was mistaken. It fell among the rushes on the borders of alittle woodland lake. The bottle neck remembered well how long itlay there unseen. "I gave them wine, and they gave me muddy water," hehad said to himself, "but I suppose it was all well meant." He couldno longer see the betrothed couple, nor the cheerful old people; butfor a long time he could hear them rejoicing and singing. At lengththere came by two peasant boys, who peeped in among the reeds andspied out the bottle. Then they took it up and carried it home withthem, so that once more it was provided for. At home in their woodencottage these boys had an elder brother, a sailor, who was about tostart on a long voyage. He had been there the day before to sayfarewell, and his mother was now very busy packing up various thingsfor him to take with him on his voyage. In the evening his fatherwas going to carry the parcel to the town to see his son once more,and take him a farewell greeting from his mother. A small bottle hadalready been filled with herb tea, mixed with brandy, and wrapped in aparcel; but when the boys came in they brought with them a largerand stronger bottle, which they had found. This bottle would hold somuch more than the little one, and they all said the brandy would beso good for complaints of the stomach, especially as it was mixed withmedical herbs. The liquid which they now poured into the bottle wasnot like the red wine with which it had once been filled; these werebitter drops, but they are of great use sometimes-for the stomach. Thenew large bottle was to go, not the little one: so the bottle oncemore started on its travels. It was taken on board (for Peter Jensenwas one of the crew) the very same ship in which the young mate was tosail. But the mate did not see the bottle: indeed, if he had hewould not have known it, or supposed it was the one out of whichthey had drunk to the felicity of the betrothed and to the prospect ofa marriage on his own happy return. Certainly the bottle no longerpoured forth wine, but it contained something quite as good; and so ithappened that whenever Peter Jensen brought it out, his messmates gaveit the name of "the apothecary," for it contained the best medicine tocure the stomach, and he gave it out quite willingly as long as a dropremained. Those were happy days, and the bottle would sing when rubbedwith a cork, and it was called a great lark," "Peter Jensen's lark."

Long days and months rolled by, during which the bottle stoodempty in a corner, when a storm arose- whether on the passage out orhome it could not tell, for it had never been ashore. It was aterrible storm, great waves arose, darkly heaving and tossing thevessel to and fro. The main mast was split asunder, the ship spranga leak, and the pumps became useless, while all around was black asnight. At the last moment, when the ship was sinking, the young matewrote on a piece of paper, "We are going down: God's will be done."Then he wrote the name of his betrothed, his own name, and that of theship. Then he put the leaf in an empty bottle that happened to be athand, corked it down tightly, and threw it into the foaming sea. Heknew not that it was the very same bottle from which the goblet of joyand hope had once been filled for him, and now it was tossing on thewaves with his last greeting, and a message from the dead. The shipsank, and the crew sank with her; but the bottle flew on like abird, for it bore within it a loving letter from a loving heart. Andas the sun rose and set, the bottle felt as at the time of its firstexistence, when in the heated glowing stove it had a longing to flyaway. It outlived the storms and the calm, it struck against no rocks,was not devoured by sharks, but drifted on for more than a year,sometimes towards the north, sometimes towards the south, just asthe current carried it. It was in all other ways its own master, buteven of that one may get tired. The written leaf, the last farewell ofthe bridegroom to his bride, would only bring sorrow when once itreached her hands; but where were those hands, so soft and delicate,which had once spread the table-cloth on the fresh grass in thegreen wood, on the day of her betrothal? Ah, yes! where was thefurrier's daughter? and where was the land which might lie nearestto her home?

The bottle knew not, it travelled onward and onward, and at lastall this wandering about became wearisome; at all events it was notits usual occupation. But it had to travel, till at length itreached land- a foreign country. Not a word spoken in this countrycould the bottle understand; it was a language it had never beforeheard, and it is a great loss not to be able to understand a language.The bottle was fished out of the water, and examined on all sides. Thelittle letter contained within it was discovered, taken out, andturned and twisted in every direction; but the people could notunderstand what was written upon it. They could be quite sure that thebottle had been thrown overboard from a vessel, and that somethingabout it was written on this paper: but what was written? that was thequestion,- so the paper was put back into the bottle, and then bothwere put away in a large cupboard of one of the great houses of thetown. Whenever any strangers arrived, the paper was taken out andturned over and over, so that the address, which was only written inpencil, became almost illegible, and at last no one coulddistinguish any letters on it at all. For a whole year the bottleremained standing in the cupboard, and then it was taken up to theloft, where it soon became covered with dust and cobwebs. Ah! howoften then it thought of those better days- of the times when in thefresh, green wood, it had poured forth rich wine; or, while rockedby the swelling waves, it had carried in its bosom a secret, a letter,a last parting sigh. For full twenty years it stood in the loft, andit might have stayed there longer but that the house was going to berebuilt. The bottle was discovered when the roof was taken off; theytalked about it, but the bottle did not understand what they said- alanguage is not to be learnt by living in a loft, even for twentyyears. "If I had been down stairs in the room," thought the bottle, "Imight have learnt it." It was now washed and rinsed, which process wasreally quite necessary, and afterwards it looked clean andtransparent, and felt young again in its old age; but the paperwhich it had carried so faithfully was destroyed in the washing.They filled the bottle with seeds, though it scarcely knew what hadbeen placed in it. Then they corked it down tightly, and carefullywrapped it up. There not even the light of a torch or lantern couldreach it, much less the brightness of the sun or moon. "And yet,"thought the bottle, "men go on a journey that they may see as muchas possible, and I can see nothing." However, it did something quiteas important; it travelled to the place of its destination, and wasunpacked.

"What trouble they have taken with that bottle over yonder!"said one, and very likely it is broken after all." But the bottlewas not broken, and, better still, it understood every word that wassaid: this language it had heard at the furnaces and at the winemerchant's; in the forest and on the ship,- it was the only good oldlanguage it could understand. It had returned home, and the languagewas as a welcome greeting. For very joy, it felt ready to jump outof people's hands, and scarcely noticed that its cork had beendrawn, and its contents emptied out, till it found itself carried to acellar, to be left there and forgotten. "There's no place like home,even if it's a cellar." It never occurred to him to think that hemight lie there for years, he felt so comfortable. For many long yearshe remained in the cellar, till at last some people came to carry awaythe bottles, and ours amongst the number.

Out in the garden there was a great festival. Brilliant lamps hungin festoons from tree to tree; and paper lanterns, through which thelight shone till they looked like transparent tulips. It was abeautiful evening, and the weather mild and clear. The stars twinkled;and the new moon, in the form of a crescent, was surrounded by theshadowy disc of the whole moon, and looked like a gray globe with agolden rim: it was a beautiful sight for those who had good eyes.The illumination extended even to the most retired of the gardenwalks, at least not so retired that any one need lose himself there.In the borders were placed bottles, each containing a light, and amongthem the bottle with which we are acquainted, and whose fate it was,one day, to be only a bottle neck, and to serve as a water-glass toa bird's-cage. Everything here appeared lovely to our bottle, for itwas again in the green wood, amid joy and feasting; again it heardmusic and song, and the noise and murmur of a crowd, especially inthat part of the garden where the lamps blazed, and the paper lanternsdisplayed their brilliant colors. It stood in a distant walkcertainly, but a place pleasant for contemplation; and it carried alight; and was at once useful and ornamental. In such an hour it iseasy to forget that one has spent twenty years in a loft, and a goodthing it is to be able to do so. Close before the bottle passed asingle pair, like the bridal pair- the mate and the furrier'sdaughter- who had so long ago wandered in the wood. It seemed to thebottle as if he were living that time over again. Not only theguests but other people were walking in the garden, who were allowedto witness the splendor and the festivities. Among the latter camean old maid, who seemed to be quite alone in the world. She wasthinking, like the bottle, of the green wood, and of a young betrothedpair, who were closely connected with herself; she was thinking ofthat hour, the happiest of her life, in which she had taken part, whenshe had herself been one of that betrothed pair; such hours arenever to be forgotten, let a maiden be as old as she may. But shedid not recognize the bottle, neither did the bottle notice the oldmaid. And so we often pass each other in the world when we meet, asdid these two, even while together in the same town.

The bottle was taken from the garden, and again sent to a winemerchant, where it was once more filled with wine, and sold to anaeronaut, who was to make an ascent in his balloon on the followingSunday. A great crowd assembled to witness the sight; military musichad been engaged, and many other preparations made. The bottle sawit all from the basket in which he lay close to a live rabbit. Therabbit was quite excited because he knew that he was to be taken up,and let down again in a parachute. The bottle, however, knew nothingof the "up," or the "down;" he saw only that the balloon wasswelling larger and larger till it could swell no more, and began torise and be restless. Then the ropes which held it were cut through,and the aerial ship rose in the air with the aeronaut and the basketcontaining the bottle and the rabbit, while the music sounded andall the people shouted "Hurrah."

"This is a wonderful journey up into the air," thought the bottle;"it is a new way of sailing, and here, at least, there is no fear ofstriking against anything."

Thousands of people gazed at the balloon, and the old maid who wasin the garden saw it also; for she stood at the open window of thegarret, by which hung the cage containing the linnet, who then hadno water-glass, but was obliged to be contented with an old cup. Inthe window-sill stood a myrtle in a pot, and this had been pushed alittle on one side, that it might not fall out; for the old maid wasleaning out of the window, that she might see. And she did seedistinctly the aeronaut in the balloon, and how he let down the rabbitin the parachute, and then drank to the health of all the spectatorsin the wine from the bottle. After doing this, he hurled it highinto the air. How little she thought that this was the very samebottle which her friend had thrown aloft in her honor, on that happyday of rejoicing, in the green wood, in her youthful days. Thebottle had no time to think, when raised so suddenly; and before itwas aware, it reached the highest point it had ever attained in itslife. Steeples and roofs lay far, far beneath it, and the peoplelooked as tiny as possible. Then it began to descend much more rapidlythan the rabbit had done, made somersaults in the air, and felt itselfquite young and unfettered, although it was half full of wine. Butthis did not last long. What a journey it was! All the people couldsee the bottle; for the sun shone upon it. The balloon was already faraway, and very soon the bottle was far away also; for it fell upon aroof, and broke in pieces. But the pieces had got such an impetus inthem, that they could not stop themselves. They went jumping androlling about, till at last they fell into the court-yard, and werebroken into still smaller pieces; only the neck of the bottlemanaged to keep whole, and it was broken off as clean as if it hadbeen cut with a diamond.

"That would make a capital bird's glass," said one of thecellar-men; but none of them had either a bird or a cage, and it wasnot to be expected they would provide one just because they hadfound a bottle neck that could be used as a glass. But the old maidwho lived in the garret had a bird, and it really might be useful toher; so the bottle neck was provided with a cork, and taken up to her;and, as it often happens in life, the part that had been uppermost wasnow turned downwards, and it was filled with fresh water. Then theyhung it in the cage of the little bird, who sang and twittered moremerrily than ever.

"Ah, you have good reason to sing," said the bottle neck, whichwas looked upon as something very remarkable, because it had been in aballoon; nothing further was known of its history. As it hung there inthe bird's-cage, it could hear the noise and murmur of the people inthe street below, as well as the conversation of the old maid in theroom within. An old friend had just come to visit her, and theytalked, not about the bottle neck, but of the myrtle in the window.

"No, you must not spend a dollar for your daughter's bridalbouquet," said the old maid; "you shall have a beautiful littlebunch for a nosegay, full of blossoms. Do you see how splendidly thetree has grown? It has been raised from only a little sprig ofmyrtle that you gave me on the day after my betrothal, and fromwhich I was to make my own bridal bouquet when a year had passed:but that day never came; the eyes were closed which were to havebeen my light and joy through life. In the depths of the sea mybeloved sleeps sweetly; the myrtle has become an old tree, and I ama still older woman. Before the sprig you gave me faded, I took aspray, and planted it in the earth; and now, as you see, it has becomea large tree, and a bunch of the blossoms shall at last appear at awedding festival, in the bouquet of your daughter."

There were tears in the eyes of the old maid, as she spoke ofthe beloved of her youth, and of their betrothal in the wood. Manythoughts came into her mind; but the thought never came, that quiteclose to her, in that very window, was a remembrance of those oldentimes,- the neck of the bottle which had, as it were shouted for joywhen the cork flew out with a bang on the betrothal day. But thebottle neck did not recognize the old maid; he had not beenlistening to what she had related, perhaps because he was thinkingso much about her.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE BRAVE TIN SOLDIER

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE were once five-and-twenty tin soldiers, who were allbrothers, for they had been made out of the same old tin spoon. Theyshouldered arms and looked straight before them, and wore a splendiduniform, red and blue. The first thing in the world they ever heardwere the words, "Tin soldiers!" uttered by a little boy, who clappedhis hands with delight when the lid of the box, in which they lay, wastaken off. They were given him for a birthday present, and he stood atthe table to set them up. The soldiers were all exactly alike,excepting one, who had only one leg; he had been left to the last, andthen there was not enough of the melted tin to finish him, so theymade him to stand firmly on one leg, and this caused him to be veryremarkable.

The table on which the tin soldiers stood, was covered withother playthings, but the most attractive to the eye was a prettylittle paper castle. Through the small windows the rooms could beseen. In front of the castle a number of little trees surrounded apiece of looking-glass, which was intended to represent atransparent lake. Swans, made of wax, swam on the lake, and werereflected in it. All this was very pretty, but the prettiest of allwas a tiny little lady, who stood at the open door of the castle; she,also, was made of paper, and she wore a dress of clear muslin, witha narrow blue ribbon over her shoulders just like a scarf. In front ofthese was fixed a glittering tinsel rose, as large as her wholeface. The little lady was a dancer, and she stretched out both herarms, and raised one of her legs so high, that the tin soldier couldnot see it at all, and he thought that she, like himself, had only oneleg. "That is the wife for me," he thought; "but she is too grand, andlives in a castle, while I have only a box to live in, five-and-twentyof us altogether, that is no place for her. Still I must try andmake her acquaintance." Then he laid himself at full length on thetable behind a snuff-box that stood upon it, so that he could peepat the little delicate lady, who continued to stand on one leg withoutlosing her balance. When evening came, the other tin soldiers were allplaced in the box, and the people of the house went to bed. Then theplaythings began to have their own games together, to pay visits, tohave sham fights, and to give balls. The tin soldiers rattled in theirbox; they wanted to get out and join the amusements, but they couldnot open the lid. The nut-crackers played at leap-frog, and the penciljumped about the table. There was such a noise that the canary woke upand began to talk, and in poetry too. Only the tin soldier and thedancer remained in their places. She stood on tiptoe, with her legsstretched out, as firmly as he did on his one leg. He never took hiseyes from her for even a moment. The clock struck twelve, and, witha bounce, up sprang the lid of the snuff-box; but, instead of snuff,there jumped up a little black goblin; for the snuff-box was a toypuzzle.

"Tin soldier," said the goblin, "don't wish for what does notbelong to you.

But the tin soldier pretended not to hear.

"Very well; wait till to-morrow, then," said the goblin.

When the children came in the next morning, they placed the tinsoldier in the window. Now, whether it was the goblin who did it, orthe draught, is not known, but the window flew open, and out fellthe tin soldier, heels over head, from the third story, into thestreet beneath. It was a terrible fall; for he came head downwards,his helmet and his bayonet stuck in between the flagstones, and hisone leg up in the air. The servant maid and the little boy went downstairs directly to look for him; but he was nowhere to be seen,although once they nearly trod upon him. If he had called out, "Here Iam," it would have been all right, but he was too proud to cry out forhelp while he wore a uniform.

Presently it began to rain, and the drops fell faster andfaster, till there was a heavy shower. When it was over, two boyshappened to pass by, and one of them said, "Look, there is a tinsoldier. He ought to have a boat to sail in."

So they made a boat out of a newspaper, and placed the tin soldierin it, and sent him sailing down the gutter, while the two boys ran bythe side of it, and clapped their hands. Good gracious, what largewaves arose in that gutter! and how fast the stream rolled on! for therain had been very heavy. The paper boat rocked up and down, andturned itself round sometimes so quickly that the tin soldiertrembled; yet he remained firm; his countenance did not change; helooked straight before him, and shouldered his musket. Suddenly theboat shot under a bridge which formed a part of a drain, and then itwas as dark as the tin soldier's box.

"Where am I going now?" thought he. "This is the black goblin'sfault, I am sure. Ah, well, if the little lady were only here withme in the boat, I should not care for any darkness."

Suddenly there appeared a great water-rat, who lived in the drain.

"Have you a passport?" asked the rat, "give it to me at once." Butthe tin soldier remained silent and held his musket tighter than ever.The boat sailed on and the rat followed it. How he did gnash his teethand cry out to the bits of wood and straw, "Stop him, stop him; he hasnot paid toll, and has not shown his pass." But the stream rushed onstronger and stronger. The tin soldier could already see daylightshining where the arch ended. Then he heard a roaring sound quiteterrible enough to frighten the bravest man. At the end of thetunnel the drain fell into a large canal over a steep place, whichmade it as dangerous for him as a waterfall would be to us. He was tooclose to it to stop, so the boat rushed on, and the poor tin soldiercould only hold himself as stiffly as possible, without moving aneyelid, to show that he was not afraid. The boat whirled round threeor four times, and then filled with water to the very edge; nothingcould save it from sinking. He now stood up to his neck in water,while deeper and deeper sank the boat, and the paper became soft andloose with the wet, till at last the water closed over the soldier'shead. He thought of the elegant little dancer whom he should never seeagain, and the words of the song sounded in his ears-

 "Farewell, warrior! ever brave,

  Drifting onward to thy grave."

Then the paper boat fell to pieces, and the soldier sank intothe water and immediately afterwards was swallowed up by a great fish.Oh how dark it was inside the fish! A great deal darker than in thetunnel, and narrower too, but the tin soldier continued firm, andlay at full length shouldering his musket. The fish swam to and fro,making the most wonderful movements, but at last he became quitestill. After a while, a flash of lightning seemed to pass through him,and then the daylight approached, and a voice cried out, "I declarehere is the tin soldier." The fish had been caught, taken to themarket and sold to the cook, who took him into the kitchen and cut himopen with a large knife. She picked up the soldier and held him by thewaist between her finger and thumb, and carried him into the room.They were all anxious to see this wonderful soldier who hadtravelled about inside a fish; but he was not at all proud. Theyplaced him on the table, and- how many curious things do happen in theworld!- there he was in the very same room from the window of which hehad fallen, there were the same children, the same playthings,standing on the table, and the pretty castle with the elegant littledancer at the door; she still balanced herself on one leg, and held upthe other, so she was as firm as himself. It touched the tin soldierso much to see her that he almost wept tin tears, but he kept themback. He only looked at her and they both remained silent. Presentlyone of the little boys took up the tin soldier, and threw him into thestove. He had no reason for doing so, therefore it must have beenthe fault of the black goblin who lived in the snuff-box. The flameslighted up the tin soldier, as he stood, the heat was very terrible,but whether it proceeded from the real fire or from the fire of lovehe could not tell. Then he could see that the bright colors were fadedfrom his uniform, but whether they had been washed off during hisjourney or from the effects of his sorrow, no one could say. He lookedat the little lady, and she looked at him. He felt himself meltingaway, but he still remained firm with his gun on his shoulder.Suddenly the door of the room flew open and the draught of aircaught up the little dancer, she fluttered like a sylph right into thestove by the side of the tin soldier, and was instantly in flamesand was gone. The tin soldier melted down into a lump, and the nextmorning, when the maid servant took the ashes out of the stove, shefound him in the shape of a little tin heart. But of the little dancernothing remained but the tinsel rose, which was burnt black as acinder.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE BUCKWHEAT

   by Hans Christian Andersen

VERY often, after a violent thunder-storm, a field of buckwheatappears blackened and singed, as if a flame of fire had passed overit. The country people say that this appearance is caused bylightning; but I will tell you what the sparrow says, and thesparrow heard it from an old willow-tree which grew near a field ofbuckwheat, and is there still. It is a large venerable tree, thougha little crippled by age. The trunk has been split, and out of thecrevice grass and brambles grow. The tree bends for-ward slightly, andthe branches hang quite down to the ground just like green hair.Corn grows in the surrounding fields, not only rye and barley, butoats,-pretty oats that, when ripe, look like a number of little goldencanary-birds sitting on a bough. The corn has a smiling look and theheaviest and richest ears bend their heads low as if in pioushumility. Once there was also a field of buckwheat, and this field wasexactly opposite to old willow-tree. The buckwheat did not bend likethe other grain, but erected its head proudly and stiffly on the stem."I am as valuable as any other corn," said he, "and I am muchhandsomer; my flowers are as beautiful as the bloom of the appleblossom, and it is a pleasure to look at us. Do you know of anythingprettier than we are, you old willow-tree?"

And the willow-tree nodded his head, as if he would say, "Indeed Ido."

But the buckwheat spread itself out with pride, and said,"Stupid tree; he is so old that grass grows out of his body."

There arose a very terrible storm. All the field-flowers foldedtheir leaves together, or bowed their little heads, while the stormpassed over them, but the buckwheat stood erect in its pride. "Bendyour head as we do," said the flowers.

"I have no occasion to do so," replied the buckwheat.

"Bend your head as we do," cried the ears of corn; "the angel ofthe storm is coming; his wings spread from the sky above to theearth beneath. He will strike you down before you can cry for mercy."

"But I will not bend my head," said the buckwheat.

"Close your flowers and bend your leaves," said the oldwillow-tree. "Do not look at the lightning when the cloud bursts; evenmen cannot do that. In a flash of lightning heaven opens, and we canlook in; but the sight will strike even human beings blind. Whatthen must happen to us, who only grow out of the earth, and are soinferior to them, if we venture to do so?"

"Inferior, indeed!" said the buckwheat. "Now I intend to have apeep into heaven." Proudly and boldly he looked up, while thelightning flashed across the sky as if the whole world were in flames.

When the dreadful storm had passed, the flowers and the cornraised their drooping heads in the pure still air, refreshed by therain, but the buckwheat lay like a weed in the field, burnt toblackness by the lightning. The branches of the old willow-treerustled in the wind, and large water-drops fell from his green leavesas if the old willow were weeping. Then the sparrows asked why he wasweeping, when all around him seemed so cheerful. "See," they said,how the sun shines, and the clouds float in the blue sky. Do you notsmell the sweet perfume from flower and bush? Wherefore do you weep,old willow-tree?" Then the willow told them of the haughty pride ofthe buckwheat, and of the punishment which followed in consequence.

This is the story told me by the sparrows one evening when Ibegged them to relate some tale to me.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE BUTTERFLY

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once a butterfly who wished for a bride, and, as maybe supposed, he wanted to choose a very pretty one from among theflowers. He glanced, with a very critical eye, at all the flower-beds,and found that the flowers were seated quietly and demurely on theirstalks, just as maidens should sit before they are engaged; butthere was a great number of them, and it appeared as if his searchwould become very wearisome. The butterfly did not like to take toomuch trouble, so he flew off on a visit to the daisies. The Frenchcall this flower "Marguerite," and they say that the little daisycan prophesy. Lovers pluck off the leaves, and as they pluck eachleaf, they ask a question about their lovers; thus: "Does he or shelove me?- Ardently? Distractedly? Very much? A little? Not at all?"and so on. Every one speaks these words in his own language. Thebutterfly came also to Marguerite to inquire, but he did not pluck offher leaves; he pressed a kiss on each of them, for he thought therewas always more to be done by kindness.

"Darling Marguerite daisy," he said to her, "you are the wisestwoman of all the flowers. Pray tell me which of the flowers I shallchoose for my wife. Which will be my bride? When I know, I will flydirectly to her, and propose."

But Marguerite did not answer him; she was offended that he shouldcall her a woman when she was only a girl; and there is a greatdifference. He asked her a second time, and then a third; but sheremained dumb, and answered not a word. Then he would wait nolonger, but flew away, to commence his wooing at once. It was in theearly spring, when the crocus and the snowdrop were in full bloom.

"They are very pretty," thought the butterfly; "charming littlelasses; but they are rather formal."

Then, as the young lads often do, he looked out for the eldergirls. He next flew to the anemones; these were rather sour to histaste. The violet, a little too sentimental. The lime-blossoms, toosmall, and besides, there was such a large family of them. Theapple-blossoms, though they looked like roses, bloomed to-day, butmight fall off to-morrow, with the first wind that blew; and hethought that a marriage with one of them might last too short atime. The pea-blossom pleased him most of all; she was white andred, graceful and slender, and belonged to those domestic maidenswho have a pretty appearance, and can yet be useful in the kitchen. Hewas just about to make her an offer, when, close by the maiden, he sawa pod, with a withered flower hanging at the end.

"Who is that?" he asked.

"That is my sister," replied the pea-blossom.

"Oh, indeed; and you will be like her some day," said he; and heflew away directly, for he felt quite shocked.

A honeysuckle hung forth from the hedge, in full bloom; butthere were so many girls like her, with long faces and sallowcomplexions. No; he did not like her. But which one did he like?

Spring went by, and summer drew towards its close; autumn came;but he had not decided. The flowers now appeared in their mostgorgeous robes, but all in vain; they had not the fresh, fragrantair of youth. For the heart asks for fragrance, even when it is nolonger young; and there is very little of that to be found in thedahlias or the dry chrysanthemums; therefore the butterfly turned tothe mint on the ground. You know, this plant has no blossom; but it issweetness all over,- full of fragrance from head to foot, with thescent of a flower in every leaf.

"I will take her," said the butterfly; and he made her an offer.But the mint stood silent and stiff, as she listened to him. At lastshe said,-

"Friendship, if you please; nothing more. I am old, and you areold, but we may live for each other just the same; as to marrying- no;don't let us appear ridiculous at our age."

And so it happened that the butterfly got no wife at all. He hadbeen too long choosing, which is always a bad plan. And thebutterfly became what is called an old bachelor.

It was late in the autumn, with rainy and cloudy weather. The coldwind blew over the bowed backs of the willows, so that they creakedagain. It was not the weather for flying about in summer clothes;but fortunately the butterfly was not out in it. He had got ashelter by chance. It was in a room heated by a stove, and as warmas summer. He could exist here, he said, well enough.

"But it is not enough merely to exist," said he, "I needfreedom, sunshine, and a little flower for a companion."

Then he flew against the window-pane, and was seen and admiredby those in the room, who caught him, and stuck him on a pin, in a boxof curiosities. They could not do more for him.

"Now I am perched on a stalk, like the flowers," said thebutterfly. "It is not very pleasant, certainly; I should imagine it issomething like being married; for here I am stuck fast." And with thisthought he consoled himself a little.

"That seems very poor consolation," said one of the plants inthe room, that grew in a pot.

"Ah," thought the butterfly, "one can't very well trust theseplants in pots; they have too much to do with mankind."

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE CHILD IN THE GRAVE

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IT was a very sad day, and every heart in the house felt thedeepest grief; for the youngest child, a boy of four years old, thejoy and hope of his parents, was dead. Two daughters, the elder ofwhom was going to be confirmed, still remained: they were both good,charming girls; but the lost child always seems the dearest; andwhen it is youngest, and a son, it makes the trial still more heavy.The sisters mourned as young hearts can mourn, and were especiallygrieved at the sight of their parents' sorrow. The father's heartwas bowed down, but the mother sunk completely under the deep grief.Day and night she had attended to the sick child, nursing and carryingit in her bosom, as a part of herself. She could not realize thefact that the child was dead, and must be laid in a coffin to restin the ground. She thought God could not take her darling little onefrom her; and when it did happen notwithstanding her hopes and herbelief, and there could be no more doubt on the subject, she said inher feverish agony, "God does not know it. He has hard-heartedministering spirits on earth, who do according to their own will,and heed not a mother's prayers." Thus in her great grief she fellaway from her faith in God, and dark thoughts arose in her mindrespecting death and a future state. She tried to believe that man wasbut dust, and that with his life all existence ended. But these doubtswere no support to her, nothing on which she could rest, and shesunk into the fathomless depths of despair. In her darkest hours sheceased to weep, and thought not of the young daughters who werestill left to her. The tears of her husband fell on her forehead,but she took no notice of him; her thoughts were with her deadchild; her whole existence seemed wrapped up in the remembrances ofthe little one and of every innocent word it had uttered.

The day of the little child's funeral came. For nightspreviously the mother had not slept, but in the morning twilight ofthis day she sunk from weariness into a deep sleep; in the mean timethe coffin was carried into a distant room, and there nailed down,that she might not hear the blows of the hammer. When she awoke, andwanted to see her child, the husband, with tears, said, "We haveclosed the coffin; it was necessary to do so."

"When God is so hard to me, how can I expect men to be better?"she said with groans and tears.

The coffin was carried to the grave, and the disconsolate mothersat with her young daughters. She looked at them, but she saw themnot; for her thoughts were far away from the domestic hearth. She gaveherself up to her grief, and it tossed her to and fro, as the seatosses a ship without compass or rudder. So the day of the funeralpassed away, and similar days followed, of dark, wearisome pain.With tearful eyes and mournful glances, the sorrowing daughters andthe afflicted husband looked upon her who would not hear their wordsof comfort; and, indeed, what comforting words could they speak,when they were themselves so full of grief? It seemed as if shewould never again know sleep, and yet it would have been her bestfriend, one who would have strengthened her body and poured peace intoher soul. They at last persuaded her to lie down, and then she wouldlie as still as if she slept.

One night, when her husband listened, as he often did, to herbreathing, he quite believed that she had at length found rest andrelief in sleep. He folded his arms and prayed, and soon sunkhimself into healthful sleep; therefore he did not notice that hiswife arose, threw on her clothes, and glided silently from thehouse, to go where her thoughts constantly lingered- to the grave ofher child. She passed through the garden, to a path across a fieldthat led to the churchyard. No one saw her as she walked, nor didshe see any one; for her eyes were fixed upon the one object of herwanderings. It was a lovely starlight night in the beginning ofSeptember, and the air was mild and still. She entered thechurchyard, and stood by the little grave, which looked like a largenosegay of fragrant flowers. She sat down, and bent her head low overthe grave, as if she could see her child through the earth thatcovered him- her little boy, whose smile was so vividly before her,and the gentle expression of whose eyes, even on his sick-bed, shecould not forget. How full of meaning that glance had been, as sheleaned over him, holding in hers the pale hand which he had no longerstrength to raise! As she had sat by his little cot, so now she satby his grave; and here she could weep freely, and her tears fell uponit.

"Thou wouldst gladly go down and be with thy child," said avoice quite close to her,- a voice that sounded so deep and clear,that it went to her heart.

She looked up, and by her side stood a man wrapped in a blackcloak, with a hood closely drawn over his face; but her keen glancecould distinguish the face under the hood. It was stern, yetawakened confidence, and the eyes beamed with youthful radiance.

"Down to my child," she repeated; and tones of despair andentreaty sounded in the words.

"Darest thou to follow me?" asked the form. "I am Death."

She bowed her head in token of assent. Then suddenly it appearedas if all the stars were shining with the radiance of the full moon onthe many-colored flowers that decked the grave. The earth that coveredit was drawn back like a floating drapery. She sunk down, and thespectre covered her with a black cloak; night closed around her, thenight of death. She sank deeper than the spade of the sexton couldpenetrate, till the churchyard became a roof above her. Then the cloakwas removed, and she found herself in a large hall, ofwide-spreading dimensions, in which there was a subdued light, liketwilight, reigning, and in a moment her child appeared before her,smiling, and more beautiful than ever; with a silent cry she pressedhim to her heart. A glorious strain of music sounded- now distant, nownear. Never had she listened to such tones as these; they came frombeyond a large dark curtain which separated the regions of deathfrom the land of eternity.

"My sweet, darling mother," she heard the child say. It was thewell-known, beloved voice; and kiss followed kiss, in boundlessdelight. Then the child pointed to the dark curtain. "There is nothingso beautiful on earth as it is here. Mother, do you not see themall? Oh, it is happiness indeed."

But the mother saw nothing of what the child pointed out, only thedark curtain. She looked with earthly eyes, and could not see as thechild saw,- he whom God has called to be with Himself. She couldhear the sounds of music, but she heard not the words, the Word inwhich she was to trust.

"I can fly now, mother," said the child; "I can fly with otherhappy children into the presence of the Almighty. I would fain flyaway now; but if you weep for me as you are weeping now, you may neversee me again. And yet I would go so gladly. May I not fly away? Andyou will come to me soon, will you not, dear mother?"

"Oh, stay, stay!" implored the mother; "only one moment more; onlyonce more, that I may look upon thee, and kiss thee, and press thee tomy heart."

Then she kissed and fondled her child. Suddenly her name wascalled from above; what could it mean? her name uttered in a plaintivevoice.

"Hearest thou?" said the child. "It is my father who callsthee." And in a few moments deep sighs were heard, as of childrenweeping. "They are my sisters," said the child. "Mother, surely youhave not forgotten them."

And then she remembered those she left behind, and a greatterror came over her. She looked around her at the dark night. Dimforms flitted by. She seemed to recognize some of them, as theyfloated through the regions of death towards the dark curtain, wherethey vanished. Would her husband and her daughters flit past? No;their sighs and lamentations still sounded from above; and she hadnearly forgotten them, for the sake of him who was dead.

"Mother, now the bells of heaven are ringing," said the child;"mother, the sun is going to rise."

An overpowering light streamed in upon her, the child hadvanished, and she was being borne upwards. All around her became cold;she lifted her head, and saw that she was lying in the churchyard,on the grave of her child. The Lord, in a dream, had been a guide toher feet and a light to her spirit. She bowed her knees, and prayedfor forgiveness. She had wished to keep back a soul from itsimmortal flight; she had forgotten her duties towards the living whowere left her. And when she had offered this prayer, her heart feltlighter. The sun burst forth, over her head a little bird carolled hissong, and the church-bells sounded for the early service. Everythingaround her seemed holy, and her heart was chastened. Sheacknowledged the goodness of God, she acknowledged the duties shehad to perform, and eagerly she returned home. She bent over herhusband, who still slept; her warm, devoted kiss awakened him, andwords of heartfelt love fell from the lips of both. Now she was gentleand strong as a wife can be; and from her lips came the words offaith: "Whatever He doeth is right and best."

Then her husband asked, "From whence hast thou all at once derivedsuch strength and comforting faith?"

And as she kissed him and her children, she said, "It came fromGod, through my child in the grave."

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   THE CONCEITED APPLE-BRANCH

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IT was the month of May. The wind still blew cold; but from bushand tree, field and flower, came the welcome sound, "Spring iscome." Wild-flowers in profusion covered the hedges. Under thelittle apple-tree, Spring seemed busy, and told his tale from one ofthe branches which hung fresh and blooming, and covered withdelicate pink blossoms that were just ready to open. The branch wellknew how beautiful it was; this knowledge exists as much in the leafas in the blood; I was therefore not surprised when a nobleman'scarriage, in which sat the young countess, stopped in the road justby. She said that an apple-branch was a most lovely object, and anemblem of spring in its most charming aspect. Then the branch wasbroken off for her, and she held it in her delicate hand, andsheltered it with her silk parasol. Then they drove to the castle,in which were lofty halls and splendid drawing-rooms. Pure whitecurtains fluttered before the open windows, and beautiful flowersstood in shining, transparent vases; and in one of them, whichlooked as if it had been cut out of newly fallen snow, theapple-branch was placed, among some fresh, light twigs of beech. Itwas a charming sight. Then the branch became proud, which was verymuch like human nature.

People of every description entered the room, and, according totheir position in society, so dared they to express theiradmiration. Some few said nothing, others expressed too much, andthe apple-branch very soon got to understand that there was as muchdifference in the characters of human beings as in those of plants andflowers. Some are all for pomp and parade, others have a great deal todo to maintain their own importance, while the rest might be sparedwithout much loss to society. So thought the apple-branch, as he stoodbefore the open window, from which he could see out over gardens andfields, where there were flowers and plants enough for him to thinkand reflect upon; some rich and beautiful, some poor and humbleindeed.

"Poor, despised herbs," said the apple-branch; "there is reallya difference between them and such as I am. How unhappy they mustbe, if they can feel as those in my position do! There is a differenceindeed, and so there ought to be, or we should all be equals."

And the apple-branch looked with a sort of pity upon them,especially on a certain little flower that is found in fields and inditches. No one bound these flowers together in a nosegay; they weretoo common; they were even known to grow between the paving-stones,shooting up everywhere, like bad weeds; and they bore the very uglyname of "dog-flowers" or "dandelions."

"Poor, despised plants," said the apple-bough, "it is not yourfault that you are so ugly, and that you have such an ugly name; butit is with plants as with men,- there must be a difference."

"A difference!" cried the sunbeam, as he kissed the bloomingapple-branch, and then kissed the yellow dandelion out in thefields. All were brothers, and the sunbeam kissed them- the poorflowers as well as the rich.

The apple-bough had never thought of the boundless love of God,which extends over all the works of creation, over everything whichlives, and moves, and has its being in Him; he had never thought ofthe good and beautiful which are so often hidden, but can never remainforgotten by Him,- not only among the lower creation, but also amongmen. The sunbeam, the ray of light, knew better.

"You do not see very far, nor very clearly," he said to theapple-branch. "Which is the despised plant you so specially pity?"

"The dandelion," he replied. "No one ever places it in anosegay; it is often trodden under foot, there are so many of them;and when they run to seed, they have flowers like wool, which fly awayin little pieces over the roads, and cling to the dresses of thepeople. They are only weeds; but of course there must be weeds. O, Iam really very thankful that I was not made like one of theseflowers."

There came presently across the fields a whole group ofchildren, the youngest of whom was so small that it had to becarried by the others; and when he was seated on the grass, amongthe yellow flowers, he laughed aloud with joy, kicked out his littlelegs, rolled about, plucked the yellow flowers, and kissed them inchildlike innocence. The elder children broke off the flowers withlong stems, bent the stalks one round the other, to form links, andmade first a chain for the neck, then one to go across theshoulders, and hang down to the waist, and at last a wreath to wearround the head, so that they looked quite splendid in their garlandsof green stems and golden flowers. But the eldest among themgathered carefully the faded flowers, on the stem of which was groupedtogether the seed, in the form of a white feathery coronal. Theseloose, airy wool-flowers are very beautiful, and look like finesnowy feathers or down. The children held them to their mouths, andtried to blow away the whole coronal with one puff of the breath. Theyhad been told by their grandmothers that who ever did so would be sureto have new clothes before the end of the year. The despised flowerwas by this raised to the position of a prophet or foreteller ofevents.

"Do you see," said the sunbeam, "do you see the beauty of theseflowers? do you see their powers of giving pleasure?"

"Yes, to children," said the apple-bough.

By-and-by an old woman came into the field, and, with a bluntknife without a handle, began to dig round the roots of some of thedandelion-plants, and pull them up. With some of these she intended tomake tea for herself; but the rest she was going to sell to thechemist, and obtain some money.

"But beauty is of higher value than all this," said the apple-treebranch; "only the chosen ones can be admitted into the realms of thebeautiful. There is a difference between plants, just as there is adifference between men."

Then the sunbeam spoke of the boundless love of God, as seen increation, and over all that lives, and of the equal distribution ofHis gifts, both in time and in eternity.

"That is your opinion," said the apple-bough.

Then some people came into the room, and, among them, the youngcountess,- the lady who had placed the apple-bough in thetransparent vase, so pleasantly beneath the rays of the sunlight.She carried in her hand something that seemed like a flower. Theobject was hidden by two or three great leaves, which covered itlike a shield, so that no draught or gust of wind could injure it, andit was carried more carefully than the apple-branch had ever been.Very cautiously the large leaves were removed, and there appearedthe feathery seed-crown of the despised dandelion. This was what thelady had so carefully plucked, and carried home so safely covered,so that not one of the delicate feathery arrows of which its mist-likeshape was so lightly formed, should flutter away. She now drew itforth quite uninjured, and wondered at its beautiful form, and airylightness, and singular construction, so soon to be blown away bythe wind.

"See," she exclaimed, "how wonderfully God has made this littleflower. I will paint it with the apple-branch together. Every oneadmires the beauty of the apple-bough; but this humble flower has beenendowed by Heaven with another kind of loveliness; and although theydiffer in appearance, both are the children of the realms of beauty."

Then the sunbeam kissed the lowly flower, and he kissed theblooming apple-branch, upon whose leaves appeared a rosy blush.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   THE DAISY

   by Hans Christian Andersen

Now listen! In the country, close by the high road, stood afarmhouse; perhaps you have passed by and seen it yourself. Therewas a little flower garden with painted wooden palings in front of it;close by was a ditch, on its fresh green bank grew a little daisy; thesun shone as warmly and brightly upon it as on the magnificentgarden flowers, and therefore it thrived well. One morning it hadquite opened, and its little snow-white petals stood round theyellow centre, like the rays of the sun. It did not mind that nobodysaw it in the grass, and that it was a poor despised flower; on thecontrary, it was quite happy, and turned towards the sun, lookingupward and listening to the song of the lark high up in the air.

The little daisy was as happy as if the day had been a greatholiday, but it was only Monday. All the children were at school,and while they were sitting on the forms and learning their lessons,it sat on its thin green stalk and learnt from the sun and from itssurroundings how kind God is, and it rejoiced that the song of thelittle lark expressed so sweetly and distinctly its own feelings. Witha sort of reverence the daisy looked up to the bird that could fly andsing, but it did not feel envious. "I can see and hear," it thought;"the sun shines upon me, and the forest kisses me. How rich I am!"

In the garden close by grew many large and magnificent flowers,and, strange to say, the less fragrance they had the haughtier andprouder they were. The peonies puffed themselves up in order to belarger than the roses, but size is not everything! The tulips hadthe finest colours, and they knew it well, too, for they were standingbolt upright like candles, that one might see them the better. Intheir pride they did not see the little daisy, which looked over tothem and thought, "How rich and beautiful they are! I am sure thepretty bird will fly down and call upon them. Thank God, that Istand so near and can at least see all the splendour." And while thedaisy was still thinking, the lark came flying down, crying "Tweet,"but not to the peonies and tulips- no, into the grass to the poordaisy. Its joy was so great that it did not know what to think. Thelittle bird hopped round it and sang, "How beautifully soft thegrass is, and what a lovely little flower with its golden heart andsilver dress is growing here." The yellow centre in the daisy didindeed look like gold, while the little petals shone as brightly assilver.

How happy the daisy was! No one has the least idea. The birdkissed it with its beak, sang to it, and then rose again up to theblue sky. It was certainly more than a quarter of an hour before thedaisy recovered its senses. Half ashamed, yet glad at heart, it lookedover to the other flowers in the garden; surely they had witnessed itspleasure and the honour that had been done to it; they understoodits joy. But the tulips stood more stiffly than ever, their faces werepointed and red, because they were vexed. The peonies were sulky; itwas well that they could not speak, otherwise they would have giventhe daisy a good lecture. The little flower could very well see thatthey were ill at ease, and pitied them sincerely.

Shortly after this a girl came into the garden, with a large sharpknife. She went to the tulips and began cutting them off, one afteranother. "Ugh!" sighed the daisy, "that is terrible; now they are donefor."

The girl carried the tulips away. The daisy was glad that it wasoutside, and only a small flower- it felt very grateful. At sunsetit folded its petals, and fell asleep, and dreamt all night of the sunand the little bird.

On the following morning, when the flower once more stretchedforth its tender petals, like little arms, towards the air andlight, the daisy recognised the bird's voice, but what it sang soundedso sad. Indeed the poor bird had good reason to be sad, for it hadbeen caught and put into a cage close by the open window. It sang ofthe happy days when it could merrily fly about, of fresh green corn inthe fields, and of the time when it could soar almost up to theclouds. The poor lark was most unhappy as a prisoner in a cage. Thelittle daisy would have liked so much to help it, but what could bedone? Indeed, that was very difficult for such a small flower tofind out. It entirely forgot how beautiful everything around it was,how warmly the sun was shining, and how splendidly white its ownpetals were. It could only think of the poor captive bird, for whichit could do nothing. Then two little boys came out of the garden;one of them had a large sharp knife, like that with which the girl hadcut the tulips. They came straight towards the little daisy, whichcould not understand what they wanted.

"Here is a fine piece of turf for the lark," said one of the boys,and began to cut out a square round the daisy, so that it remainedin the centre of the grass.

"Pluck the flower off" said the other boy, and the daisytrembled for fear, for to be pulled off meant death to it; and itwished so much to live, as it was to go with the square of turf intothe poor captive lark's cage.

"No let it stay," said the other boy, "it looks so pretty".

And so it stayed, and was brought into the lark's cage. The poorbird was lamenting its lost liberty, and beating its wings against thewires; and the little daisy could not speak or utter a consoling word,much as it would have liked to do so. So the forenoon passed.

"I have no water," said the captive lark, "they have all gone out,and forgotten to give me anything to drink. My throat is dry andburning. I feel as if I had fire and ice within me, and the air isso oppressive. Alas! I must die, and part with the warm sunshine,the fresh green meadows, and all the beauty that God has created." Andit thrust its beak into the piece of grass, to refresh itself alittle. Then it noticed the little daisy, and nodded to it, and kissedit with its beak and said: "You must also fade in here, poor littleflower. You and the piece of grass are all they have given me inexchange for the whole world, which I enjoyed outside. Each littleblade of grass shall be a green tree for me, each of your white petalsa fragrant flower. Alas! you only remind me of what I have lost."

"I wish I could console the poor lark," thought the daisy. Itcould not move one of its leaves, but the fragrance of its delicatepetals streamed forth, and was much stronger than such flowers usuallyhave: the bird noticed it, although it was dying with thirst, and inits pain tore up the green blades of grass, but did not touch theflower.

The evening came, and nobody appeared to bring the poor bird adrop of water; it opened its beautiful wings, and fluttered about inits anguish; a faint and mournful "Tweet, tweet," was all it couldutter, then it bent its little head towards the flower, and itsheart broke for want and longing. The flower could not, as on theprevious evening, fold up its petals and sleep; it droppedsorrowfully. The boys only came the next morning; when they saw thedead bird, they began to cry bitterly, dug a nice grave for it, andadorned it with flowers. The bird's body was placed in a pretty redbox; they wished to bury it with royal honours. While it was alive andsang they forgot it, and let it suffer want in the cage; now, theycried over it and covered it with flowers. The piece of turf, with thelittle daisy in it, was thrown out on the dusty highway. Nobodythought of the flower which had felt so much for the bird and had sogreatly desired to comfort it.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   THE DARNING-NEEDLE

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once a darning-needle who thought herself so fine thatshe fancied she must be fit for embroidery. "Hold me tight," she wouldsay to the fingers, when they took her up, "don't let me fall; ifyou do I shall never be found again, I am so very fine."

"That is your opinion, is it?" said the fingers, as they seizedher round the body.

"See, I am coming with a train," said the darning-needle,drawing a long thread after her; but there was no knot in the thread.

The fingers then placed the point of the needle against the cook'sslipper. There was a crack in the upper leather, which had to besewn together.

"What coarse work!" said the darning-needle, "I shall never getthrough. I shall break!- I am breaking!" and sure enough she broke."Did I not say so?" said the darning-needle, "I know I am too fine forsuch work as that."

"This needle is quite useless for sewing now," said the fingers;but they still held it fast, and the cook dropped some sealing-waxon the needle, and fastened her handkerchief with it in front.

"So now I am a breast-pin," said the darning-needle; "I knewvery well I should come to honor some day: merit is sure to rise;" andshe laughed, quietly to herself, for of course no one ever saw adarning-needle laugh. And there she sat as proudly as if she were in astate coach, and looked all around her. "May I be allowed to ask ifyou are made of gold?" she inquired of her neighbor, a pin; "youhave a very pretty appearance, and a curious head, although you arerather small. You must take pains to grow, for it is not every one whohas sealing-wax dropped upon him;" and as she spoke, thedarning-needle drew herself up so proudly that she fell out of thehandkerchief right into the sink, which the cook was cleaning. "NowI am going on a journey," said the needle, as she floated away withthe dirty water, "I do hope I shall not be lost." But she really waslost in a gutter. "I am too fine for this world," said thedarning-needle, as she lay in the gutter; "but I know who I am, andthat is always some comfort." So the darning-needle kept up herproud behavior, and did not lose her good humor. Then there floatedover her all sorts of things,- chips and straws, and pieces of oldnewspaper. "See how they sail," said the darning-needle; "they donot know what is under them. I am here, and here I shall stick. See,there goes a chip, thinking of nothing in the world but himself-only a chip. There's a straw going by now; how he turns and twistsabout! Don't be thinking too much of yourself, or you may chance torun against a stone. There swims a piece of newspaper; what is writtenupon it has been forgotten long ago, and yet it gives itself airs. Isit here patiently and quietly. I know who I am, so I shall not move."

One day something lying close to the darning-needle glittered sosplendidly that she thought it was a diamond; yet it was only apiece of broken bottle. The darning-needle spoke to it, because itsparkled, and represented herself as a breast-pin. "I suppose youare really a diamond?" she said.

"Why yes, something of the kind," he replied; and so each believedthe other to be very valuable, and then they began to talk about theworld, and the conceited people in it.

"I have been in a lady's work-box," said the darning-needle,"and this lady was the cook. She had on each hand five fingers, andanything so conceited as these five fingers I have never seen; and yetthey were only employed to take me out of the box and to put me backagain."

"Were they not high-born?"

"High-born!" said the darning-needle, "no indeed, but sohaughty. They were five brothers, all born fingers; they kept veryproudly together, though they were of different lengths. The one whostood first in the rank was named the thumb, he was short and thick,and had only one joint in his back, and could therefore make but onebow; but he said that if he were cut off from a man's hand, that manwould be unfit for a soldier. Sweet-tooth, his neighbor, dippedhimself into sweet or sour, pointed to the sun and moon, and formedthe letters when the fingers wrote. Longman, the middle finger, lookedover the heads of all the others. Gold-band, the next finger, wore agolden circle round his waist. And little Playman did nothing atall, and seemed proud of it. They were boasters, and boasters theywill remain; and therefore I left them."

"And now we sit here and glitter," said the piece of brokenbottle.

At the same moment more water streamed into the gutter, so that itoverflowed, and the piece of bottle was carried away.

"So he is promoted," said the darning-needle, "while I remainhere; I am too fine, but that is my pride, and what do I care?" And soshe sat there in her pride, and had many such thoughts as these,- "Icould almost fancy that I came from a sunbeam, I am so fine. Itseems as if the sunbeams were always looking for me under the water.Ah! I am so fine that even my mother cannot find me. Had I still myold eye, which was broken off, I believe I should weep; but no, Iwould not do that, it is not genteel to cry."

One day a couple of street boys were paddling in the gutter, forthey sometimes found old nails, farthings, and other treasures. It wasdirty work, but they took great pleasure in it. "Hallo!" cried one, ashe pricked himself with the darning-needle, "here's a fellow for you."

"I am not a fellow, I am a young lady," said the darning-needle;but no one heard her.

The sealing-wax had come off, and she was quite black; but blackmakes a person look slender, so she thought herself even finer thanbefore.

"Here comes an egg-shell sailing along," said one of the boys;so they stuck the darning-needle into the egg-shell.

"White walls, and I am black myself," said the darning-needle,"that looks well; now I can be seen, but I hope I shall not besea-sick, or I shall break again." She was not sea-sick, and she didnot break. "It is a good thing against sea-sickness to have a steelstomach, and not to forget one's own importance. Now my sea-sicknesshas past: delicate people can bear a great deal."

Crack went the egg-shell, as a waggon passed over it. "Goodheavens, how it crushes!" said the darning-needle. "I shall be sicknow. I am breaking!" but she did not break, though the waggon wentover her as she lay at full length; and there let her lie.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   THE DROP OF WATER

   by Hans Christian Andersen

OF course you know what is meant by a magnifying glass- one ofthose round spectacle-glasses that make everything look a hundredtimes bigger than it is? When any one takes one of these and holdsit to his eye, and looks at a drop of water from the pond yonder, hesees above a thousand wonderful creatures that are otherwise neverdiscerned in the water. But there they are, and it is no delusion.It almost looks like a great plateful of spiders jumping about in acrowd. And how fierce they are! They tear off each other's legs. andarms and bodies, before and behind; and yet they are merry andjoyful in their way.

Now, there once was an old man whom all the people calledKribble-Krabble, for that was his name. He always wanted the best ofeverything, and when he could not manage it otherwise, he did it bymagic.

There he sat one day, and held his magnifying-glass to his eye,and looked at a drop of water that had been taken out of a puddle bythe ditch. But what a kribbling and krabbling was there! All thethousands of little creatures hopped and sprang and tugged at oneanother, and ate each other up.

"That is horrible!" said old Kribble-Krabble. "Can one notpersuade them to live in peace and quietness, so that each one maymind his own business?"

And he thought it over and over, but it would not do, and so hehad recourse to magic.

"I must give them color, that they may be seen more plainly," saidhe; and he poured something like a little drop of red wine into thedrop of water, but it was witches' blood from the lobes of the ear,the finest kind, at ninepence a drop. And now the wonderful littlecreatures were pink all over. It looked like a whole town of nakedwild men.

"What have you there?" asked another old magician, who had noname- and that was the best thing about him.

"Yes, if you can guess what it is," said Kribble-Krabble, "I'llmake you a present of it."

But it is not so easy to find out if one does not know.

And the magician who had no name looked through themagnifying-glass.

It looked really like a great town reflected there, in which allthe people were running about without clothes. It was terrible! But itwas still more terrible to see how one beat and pushed the other,and bit and hacked, and tugged and mauled him. Those at the top werebeing pulled down, and those at the bottom were struggling upwards.

"Look! look! his leg is longer than mine! Bah! Away with it! Thereis one who has a little bruise. It hurts him, but it shall hurt himstill more."

And they hacked away at him, and they pulled at him, and ate himup, because of the little bruise. And there was one sitting as stillas any little maiden, and wishing only for peace and quietness. Butnow she had to come out, and they tugged at her, and pulled her about,and ate her up.

"That's funny!" said the magician.

"Yes; but what do you think it is?" said Kribble-Krabble. "Can youfind that out?"

"Why, one can see that easily enough," said the other. "That's Paris,or some other great city, for they're all alike. It's a great city!"

"It's a drop of puddle water!" said Kribble-Krabble.

 THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

   THE DRYAD

   by Hans Christian Andersen

WE are travelling to Paris to the Exhibition.

Now we are there. That was a journey, a flight without magic. Weflew on the wings of steam over the sea and across the land.

Yes, our time is the time of fairy tales.

We are in the midst of Paris, in a great hotel. Blooming flowersornament the staircases, and soft carpets the floors.

Our room is a very cosy one, and through the open balcony doorwe have a view of a great square. Spring lives down there; it has cometo Paris, and arrived at the same time with us. It has come in theshape of a glorious young chestnut tree, with delicate leaves newlyopened. How the tree gleams, dressed in its spring garb, before allthe other trees in the place! One of these latter had been struckout of the list of living trees. It lies on the ground with rootsexposed. On the place where it stood, the young chestnut tree is to beplanted, and to flourish.

It still stands towering aloft on the heavy wagon which hasbrought it this morning a distance of several miles to Paris. Foryears it had stood there, in the protection of a mighty oak tree,under which the old venerable clergyman had often sat, with childrenlistening to his stories.

The young chestnut tree had also listened to the stories; forthe Dryad who lived in it was a child also. She remembered the timewhen the tree was so little that it only projected a short way abovethe grass and ferns around. These were as tall as they would everbe; but the tree grew every year, and enjoyed the air and thesunshine, and drank the dew and the rain. Several times it was also,as it must be, well shaken by the wind and the rain; for that is apart of education.

The Dryad rejoiced in her life, and rejoiced in the sunshine,and the singing of the birds; but she was most rejoiced at humanvoices; she understood the language of men as well as she understoodthat of animals.

Butterflies, cockchafers, dragon-flies, everything that couldfly came to pay a visit. They could all talk. They told of thevillage, of the vineyard, of the forest, of the old castle with itsparks and canals and ponds. Down in the water dwelt also livingbeings, which, in their way, could fly under the water from oneplace to another- beings with knowledge and delineation. They saidnothing at all; they were so clever!

And the swallow, who had dived, told about the pretty littlegoldfish, of the thick turbot, the fat brill, and the old carp. Theswallow could describe all that very well, but, "Self is the man," shesaid. "One ought to see these things one's self." But how was theDryad ever to see such beings? She was obliged to be satisfied withbeing able to look over the beautiful country and see the busyindustry of men.

It was glorious; but most glorious of all when the old clergymansat under the oak tree and talked of France, and of the great deeds ofher sons and daughters, whose names will be mentioned withadmiration through all time.

Then the Dryad heard of the shepherd girl, Joan of Arc, and ofCharlotte Corday; she heard about Henry the Fourth, and Napoleon theFirst; she heard names whose echo sounds in the hearts of the people.

The village children listened attentively, and the Dryad no lessattentively; she became a school-child with the rest. In the cloudsthat went sailing by she saw, picture by picture, everything thatshe heard talked about. The cloudy sky was her picture-book.

She felt so happy in beautiful France, the fruitful land ofgenius, with the crater of freedom. But in her heart the stingremained that the bird, that every animal that could fly, was muchbetter off than she. Even the fly could look about more in theworld, far beyond the Dryad's horizon.

France was so great and so glorious, but she could only lookacross a little piece of it. The land stretched out, world-wide,with vineyards, forests and great cities. Of all these Paris was themost splendid and the mightiest. The birds could get there; but she,never!

Among the village children was a little ragged, poor girl, but apretty one to look at. She was always laughing or singing andtwining red flowers in her black hair.

"Don't go to Paris!" the old clergyman warned her. "Poor child! ifyou go there, it will be your ruin."

But she went for all that.

The Dryad often thought of her; for she had the same wish, andfelt the same longing for the great city.

The Dryad's tree was bearing its first chestnut blossoms; thebirds were twittering round them in the most beautiful sunshine.Then a stately carriage came rolling along that way, and in it sat agrand lady driving the spirited, light-footed horses. On the back seata little smart groom balanced himself. The Dryad knew the lady, andthe old clergyman knew her also. He shook his head gravely when he sawher, and said:

"So you went there after all, and it was your ruin, poor Mary!"

"That one poor?" thought the Dryad. "No; she wears a dress fit fora countess" (she had become one in the city of magic changes). "Oh, ifI were only there, amid all the splendor and pomp! They shine upinto the very clouds at night; when I look up, I can tell in whatdirection the town lies."

Towards that direction the Dryad looked every evening. She sawin the dark night the gleaming cloud on the horizon; in the clearmoonlight nights she missed the sailing clouds, which showed herpictures of the city and pictures from history.

The child grasps at the picture-books, the Dryad grasped at thecloud-world, her thought-book. A sudden, cloudless sky was for her ablank leaf; and for several days she had only had such leaves beforeher.

It was in the warm summer-time: not a breeze moved through theglowing hot days. Every leaf, every flower, lay as if it weretorpid, and the people seemed torpid, too.

Then the clouds arose and covered the region round about where thegleaming mist announced "Here lies Paris."

The clouds piled themselves up like a chain of mountains,hurried on through the air, and spread themselves abroad over thewhole landscape, as far as the Dryad's eye could reach.

Like enormous blue-black blocks of rock, the clouds lay piled overone another. Gleams of lightning shot forth from them.

"These also are the servants of the Lord God," the old clergymanhad said. And there came a bluish dazzling flash of lightning, alighting up as if of the sun itself, which could burst blocks ofrock asunder. The lightning struck and split to the roots the oldvenerable oak. The crown fell asunder. It seemed as if the tree werestretching forth its arms to clasp the messengers of the light.

No bronze cannon can sound over the land at the birth of a royalchild as the thunder sounded at the death of the old oak. The rainstreamed down; a refreshing wind was blowing; the storm had gone by,and there was quite a holiday glow on all things. The old clergymanspoke a few words for honorable remembrance, and a painter made adrawing, as a lasting record of the tree.

"Everything passes away," said the Dryad, "passes away like acloud, and never comes back!"

The old clergyman, too, did not come back. The green roof of hisschool was gone, and his teaching-chair had vanished. The children didnot come; but autumn came, and winter came, and then spring also. Inall this change of seasons the Dryad looked toward the region where,at night, Paris gleamed with its bright mist far on the horizon.

Forth from the town rushed engine after engine, train after train,whistling and screaming at all hours in the day. In the evening,towards midnight, at daybreak, and all the day through, came thetrains. Out of each one, and into each one, streamed people from thecountry of every king. A new wonder of the world had summoned themto Paris.

In what form did this wonder exhibit itself?

"A splendid blossom of art and industry," said one, "hasunfolded itself in the Champ de Mars, a gigantic sunflower, from whosepetals one can learn geography and statistics, and can become aswise as a lord mayor, and raise one's self to the level of art andpoetry, and study the greatness and power of the various lands."

"A fairy tale flower," said another, "a many-coloredlotus-plant, which spreads out its green leaves like a velvet carpetover the sand. The opening spring has brought it forth, the summerwill see it in all its splendor, the autumn winds will sweep itaway, so that not a leaf, not a fragment of its root shall remain."

In front of the Military School extends in time of peace the arenaof war- a field without a blade of grass, a piece of sandy steppe,as if cut out of the Desert of Africa, where Fata Morgana displays herwondrous airy castles and hanging gardens. In the Champ de Mars,however, these were to be seen more splendid, more wonderful than inthe East, for human art had converted the airy deceptive scenes intoreality.

"The Aladdin's Palace of the present has been built," it was said."Day by day, hour by hour, it unfolds more of its wonderful splendor."

The endless halls shine in marble and many colors. "MasterBloodless" here moves his limbs of steel and iron in the greatcircular hall of machinery. Works of art in metal, in stone, inGobelins tapestry, announce the vitality of mind that is stirring inevery land. Halls of paintings, splendor of flowers, everything thatmind and skill can create in the workshop of the artisan, has beenplaced here for show. Even the memorials of ancient days, out of oldgraves and turf-moors, have appeared at this general meeting.

The overpowering great variegated whole must be divided into smallportions, and pressed together like a plaything, if it is to beunderstood and described.

Like a great table on Christmas Eve, the Champ de Mars carried awonder-castle of industry and art, and around this knickknacks fromall countries had been ranged, knickknacks on a grand scale, for everynation found some remembrance of home.

Here stood the royal palace of Egypt, there the caravanserai ofthe desert land. The Bedouin had quitted his sunny country, andhastened by on his camel. Here stood the Russian stables, with thefiery glorious horses of the steppe. Here stood the simplestraw-thatched dwelling of the Danish peasant, with the Dannebrogflag, next to Gustavus Vasa's wooden house from Dalarne, with itswonderful carvings. American huts, English cottages, French pavilions,kiosks, theatres, churches, all strewn around, and between them thefresh green turf, the clear springing water, blooming bushes, raretrees, hothouses, in which one might fancy one's self transported intothe tropical forest; whole gardens brought from Damascus, and bloomingunder one roof. What colors, what fragrance!

Artificial grottoes surrounded bodies of fresh or salt water,and gave a glimpse into the empire of the fishes; the visitor seemedto wander at the bottom of the sea, among fishes and polypi.

"All this," they said, "the Champ de Mars offers;" and aroundthe great richly-spread table the crowd of human beings moves like abusy swarm of ants, on foot or in little carriages, for not all feetare equal to such a fatiguing journey.

Hither they swarm from morning till late in the evening. Steamerafter steamer, crowded with people, glides down the Seine. Thenumber of carriages is continually on the increase. The swarm ofpeople on foot and on horseback grows more and more dense. Carriagesand omnibuses are crowded, stuffed and embroidered with people. Allthese tributary streams flow in one direction- towards the Exhibition.On every entrance the flag of France is displayed; around theworld's bazaar wave the flags of all nations. There is a humming and amurmuring from the hall of the machines; from the towers the melody ofthe chimes is heard; with the tones of the organs in the churchesmingle the hoarse nasal songs from the cafes of the East. It is akingdom of Babel, a wonder of the world!

In very truth it was. That's what all the reports said, and whodid not hear them? The Dryad knew everything that is told here ofthe new wonder in the city of cities.

"Fly away, ye birds! fly away to see, and then come back andtell me," said the Dryad.

The wish became an intense desire- became the one thought of alife. Then, in the quiet silent night, while the full moon wasshining, the Dryad saw a spark fly out of the moon's disc, and falllike a shooting star. And before the tree, whose leaves waved to andfro as if they were stirred by a tempest, stood a noble, mighty, andgrand figure. In tones that were at once rich and strong, like thetrumpet of the Last Judgment bidding farewell to life and summoning tothe great account, it said:

"Thou shalt go to the city of magic; thou shalt take root there,and enjoy the mighty rushing breezes, the air and the sunshinethere. But the time of thy life shall then be shortened; the line ofyears that awaited thee here amid the free nature shall shrink tobut a small tale. Poor Dryad! It shall be thy destruction. Thyyearning and longing will increase, thy desire will grow morestormy, the tree itself will be as a prison to thee, thou wilt quitthy cell and give up thy nature to fly out and mingle among men.Then the years that would have belonged to thee will be contractedto half the span of the ephemeral fly, that lives but a day: onenight, and thy life-taper shall be blown out- the leaves of the treewill wither and be blown away, to become green never again!"

Thus the words sounded. And the light vanished away, but not thelonging of the Dryad. She trembled in the wild fever of expectation.

"I shall go there!" she cried, rejoicingly. "Life is beginning andswells like a cloud; nobody knows whither it is hastening."

When the gray dawn arose and the moon turned pale and the cloudswere tinted red, the wished-for hour struck. The words of promise werefulfilled.

People appeared with spades and poles; they dug round the roots ofthe tree, deeper and deeper, and beneath it. A wagon was broughtout, drawn by many horses, and the tree was lifted up, with itsroots and the lumps of earth that adhered to them; matting wasplaced around the roots, as though the tree had its feet in a warmbag. And now the tree was lifted on the wagon and secured with chains.The journey began- the journey to Paris. There the tree was to grow asan ornament to the city of French glory.

The twigs and the leaves of the chestnut tree trembled in thefirst moments of its being moved; and the Dryad trembled in thepleasurable feeling of expectation.

"Away! away!" it sounded in every beat of her pulse. "Away!away" sounded in words that flew trembling along. The Dryad forgotto bid farewell to the regions of home; she thought not of thewaving grass and of the innocent daisies, which had looked up to heras to a great lady, a young Princess playing at being a shepherdessout in the open air.

The chestnut tree stood upon the wagon, and nodded his branches;whether this meant "farewell" or "forward," the Dryad knew not; shedreamed only of the marvellous new things, that seemed yet sofamiliar, and that were to unfold themselves before her. No child'sheart rejoicing in innocence- no heart whose blood danced withpassion- had set out on the journey to Paris more full ofexpectation than she.

Her "farewell" sounded in the words "Away! away!"

The wheels turned; the distant approached; the present vanished.The region was changed, even as the clouds change. New vineyards,forests, villages, villas appeared- came nearer- vanished!

The chestnut tree moved forward, and the Dryad went with it.Steam-engine after steam-engine rushed past, sending up into the airvapory clouds, that formed figures which told of Paris, whence theycame, and whither the Dryad was going.

Everything around knew it, and must know whither she was bound. Itseemed to her as if every tree she passed stretched out its leavestowards her, with the prayer- "Take me with you! take me with you!"for every tree enclosed a longing Dryad.

What changes during this flight! Houses seemed to be rising out ofthe earth- more and more- thicker and thicker. The chimneys roselike flower-pots ranged side by side, or in rows one above theother, on the roofs. Great inscriptions in letters a yard long, andfigures in various colors, covering the walls from cornice tobasement, came brightly out.

"Where does Paris begin, and when shall I be there?" asked theDryad.

The crowd of people grew; the tumult and the bustle increased;carriage followed upon carriage; people on foot and people onhorseback were mingled together; all around were shops on shops, musicand song, crying and talking.

The Dryad, in her tree, was now in the midst of Paris. The greatheavy wagon all at once stopped on a little square planted with trees.The high houses around had all of them balconies to the windows,from which the inhabitants looked down upon the young fresh chestnuttree, which was coming to be planted here as a substitute for the deadtree that lay stretched on the ground.

The passers-by stood still and smiled in admiration of its purevernal freshness. The older trees, whose buds were still closed,whispered with their waving branches, "Welcome! welcome!" Thefountain, throwing its jet of water high up in the air, to let it fallagain in the wide stone basin, told the wind to sprinkle the new-comerwith pearly drops, as if it wished to give him a refreshing draught towelcome him.

The Dryad felt how her tree was being lifted from the wagon tobe placed in the spot where it was to stand. The roots were coveredwith earth, and fresh turf was laid on top. Blooming shrubs andflowers in pots were ranged around; and thus a little garden arosein the square.

The tree that had been killed by the fumes of gas, the steam ofkitchens, and the bad air of the city, was put upon the wagon anddriven away. The passers-by looked on. Children and old men sat uponthe bench, and looked at the green tree. And we who are telling thisstory stood upon a balcony, and looked down upon the green springsight that had been brought in from the fresh country air, and said,what the old clergyman would have said, "Poor Dryad!"

"I am happy! I am happy!" the Dryad cried, rejoicing; "and yet Icannot realize, cannot describe what I feel. Everything is as Ifancied it, and yet as I did not fancy it."

The houses stood there, so lofty, so close! The sunlight shoneon only one of the walls, and that one was stuck over with bills andplacards, before which the people stood still; and this made a crowd.

Carriages rushed past, carriages rolled past; light ones and heavyones mingled together. Omnibuses, those over-crowded moving houses,came rattling by; horsemen galloped among them; even carts andwagons asserted their rights.

The Dryad asked herself if these high-grown houses, which stood soclose around her, would not remove and take other shapes, like theclouds in the sky, and draw aside, so that she might cast a glanceinto Paris, and over it. Notre Dame must show itself, the VendomeColumn, and the wondrous building which had called and was stillcalling so many strangers to the city.

But the houses did not stir from their places. It was yet day whenthe lamps were lit. The gas-jets gleamed from the shops, and shoneeven into the branches of the trees, so that it was like sunlight insummer. The stars above made their appearance, the same to which theDryad had looked up in her home. She thought she felt a clear purestream of air which went forth from them. She felt herself lifted upand strengthened, and felt an increased power of seeing throughevery leaf and through every fibre of the root. Amid all the noise andthe turmoil, the colors and the lights, she knew herself watched bymild eyes.

From the side streets sounded the merry notes of fiddles andwind instruments. Up! to the dance, to the dance! to jollity andpleasure! that was their invitation. Such music it was, that horses,carriages, trees, and houses would have danced, if they had known how.The charm of intoxicating delight filled the bosom of the Dryad.

"How glorious, how splendid it is!" she cried, rejoicingly. "Now Iam in Paris!"

The next day that dawned, the next night that fell, offered thesame spectacle, similar bustle, similar life; changing, indeed, yetalways the same; and thus it went on through the sequence of days.

"Now I know every tree, every flower on the square here! I knowevery house, every balcony, every shop in this narrow cut-offcorner, where I am denied the sight of this great mighty city. Whereare the arches of triumph, the Boulevards, the wondrous building ofthe world? I see nothing of all this. As if shut up in a cage, I standamong the high houses, which I now know by heart, with theirinscriptions, signs, and placards; all the painted confectionery, thatis no longer to my taste. Where are all the things of which I heard,for which I longed, and for whose sake I wanted to come hither? whathave I seized, found, won? I feel the same longing I felt before; Ifeel that there is a life I should wish to grasp and to experience.I must go out into the ranks of living men, and mingle among them. Imust fly about like a bird. I must see and feel, and become humanaltogether. I must enjoy the one half-day, instead of vegetating foryears in every-day sameness and weariness, in which I become ill,and at last sink and disappear like the dew on the meadows. I willgleam like the cloud, gleam in the sunshine of life, look out over thewhole like the cloud, and pass away like it, no one knoweth whither."

Thus sighed the Dryad; and she prayed:

"Take from me the years that were destined for me, and give me buthalf of the life of the ephemeral fly! Deliver me from my prison! Giveme human life, human happiness, only a short span, only the one night,if it cannot be otherwise; and then punish me for my wish to live,my longing for life! Strike me out of thy list. Let my shell, thefresh young tree, wither, or be hewn down, and burnt to ashes, andscattered to all the winds!"

A rustling went through the leaves of the tree; there was atrembling in each of the leaves; it seemed as if fire streamed throughit. A gust of wind shook its green crown, and from the midst of thatcrown a female figure came forth. In the same moment she was sittingbeneath the brightly-illuminated leafy branches, young and beautifulto behold, like poor Mary, to whom the clergyman had said, "Thegreat city will be thy destruction."

The Dryad sat at the foot of the tree- at her house door, whichshe had locked, and whose key had thrown away. So young! so fair!The stars saw her, and blinked at her. The gas-lamps saw her, andgleamed and beckoned to her. How delicate she was, and yet howblooming!- a child, and yet a grown maiden! Her dress was fine assilk, green as the freshly-opened leaves on the crown of the tree;in her nut-brown hair clung a half-opened chestnut blossom. She lookedlike the Goddess of Spring.

For one short minute she sat motionless; then she sprang up,and, light as a gazelle, she hurried away. She ran and sprang like thereflection from the mirror that, carried by the sunshine, is cast, nowhere, now there. Could any one have followed her with his eyes, hewould have seen how marvellously her dress and her form changed,according to the nature of the house or the place whose light happenedto shine upon her.

She reached the Boulevards. Here a sea of light streamed forthfrom the gas-flames of the lamps, the shops and the cafes. Herestood in a row young and slender trees, each of which concealed itsDryad, and gave shade from the artificial sunlight. The whole vastpavement was one great festive hall, where covered tables stoodladen with refreshments of all kinds, from champagne and Chartreusedown to coffee and beer. Here was an exhibition of flowers, statues,books, and colored stuffs.

From the crowd close by the lofty houses she looked forth over theterrific stream beyond the rows of trees. Yonder heaved a stream ofrolling carriages, cabriolets, coaches, omnibuses, cabs, and amongthem riding gentlemen and marching troops. To cross to the oppositeshore was an undertaking fraught with danger to life and limb. Nowlanterns shed their radiance abroad; now the gas had the upper hand;suddenly a rocket rises! Whence? Whither?

Here are sounds of soft Italian melodies; yonder, Spanish songsare sung, accompanied by the rattle of the castanets; but strongest ofall, and predominating over the rest, the street-organ tunes of themoment, the exciting "Can-Can" music, which Orpheus never knew, andwhich was never heard by the "Belle Helene." Even the barrow wastempted to hop upon one of its wheels.

The Dryad danced, floated, flew, changing her color everymoment, like a humming-bird in the sunshine; each house, with theworld belonging to it, gave her its own reflections.

As the glowing lotus-flower, torn from its stem, is carried awayby the stream, so the Dryad drifted along. Whenever she paused, shewas another being, so that none was able to follow her, to recognizeher, or to look more closely at her.

Like cloud-pictures, all things flew by her. She looked into athousand faces, but not one was familiar to her; she saw not asingle form from home. Two bright eyes had remained in her memory. Shethought of Mary, poor Mary, the ragged merry child, who wore the redflowers in her black hair. Mary was now here, in the world-city,rich and magnificent as in that day when she drove past the house ofthe old clergyman, and past the tree of the Dryad, the old oak.

Here she was certainly living, in the deafening tumult. Perhapsshe had just stepped out of one of the gorgeous carriages inwaiting. Handsome equipages, with coachmen in gold braid and footmenin silken hose, drove up. The people who alighted from them were allrichly-dressed ladies. They went through the opened gate, and ascendedthe broad staircase that led to a building resting on marblepillars. Was this building, perhaps, the wonder of the world? ThereMary would certainly be found.

"Sancta Maria!" resounded from the interior. Incense floatedthrough the lofty painted and gilded aisles, where a solemn twilightreigned.

It was the Church of the Madeleine.

Clad in black garments of the most costly stuffs, fashionedaccording to the latest mode, the rich feminine world of Parisglided across the shining pavement. The crests of the proprietors wereengraved on silver shields on the velvet-bound prayer-books, andembroidered in the corners of perfumed handkerchiefs bordered withBrussels lace. A few of the ladies were kneeling in silent prayerbefore the altars; others resorted to the confessionals.

Anxiety and fear took possession of the Dryad; she felt as ifshe had entered a place where she had no right to be. Here was theabode of silence, the hall of secrets. Everything was said inwhispers, every word was a mystery.

The Dryad saw herself enveloped in lace and silk, like the womenof wealth and of high birth around her. Had, perhaps, every one ofthem a longing in her breast, like the Dryad?

A deep, painful sigh was heard. Did it escape from someconfessional in a distant corner, or from the bosom of the Dryad?She drew the veil closer around her; she breathed incense, and not thefresh air. Here was not the abiding-place of her longing.

Away! away- a hastening without rest. The ephemeral fly knowsnot repose, for her existence is flight.

She was out again among the gas candelabra, by a magnificentfountain.

"All its streaming waters are not able to wash out the innocentblood that was spilt here."

Such were the words spoken. Strangers stood around, carrying ona lively conversation, such as no one would have dared to carry onin the gorgeous hall of secrets whence the Dryad came.

A heavy stone slab was turned and then lifted. She did notunderstand why. She saw an opening that led into the depths below. Thestrangers stepped down, leaving the starlit air and the cheerfullife of the upper world behind them.

"I am afraid," said one of the women who stood around, to herhusband, "I cannot venture to go down, nor do I care for the wondersdown yonder. You had better stay here with me."

"Indeed, and travel home," said the man, "and quit Paris withouthaving seen the most wonderful thing of all- the real wonder of thepresent period, created by the power and resolution of one man!"

"I will not go down for all that," was the reply.

"The wonder of the present time," it had been called. The Dryadhad heard and had understood it. The goal of her ardent longing hadthus been reached, and here was the entrance to it. Down into thedepths below Paris? She had not thought of such a thing; but now sheheard it said, and saw the strangers descending, and went after them.

The staircase was of cast iron, spiral, broad and easy. Belowthere burned a lamp, and farther down, another. They stood in alabyrinth of endless halls and arched passages, all communicating witheach other. All the streets and lanes of Paris were to be seen hereagain, as in a dim reflection. The names were painted up; and every,house above had its number down here also, and struck its rootsunder the macadamized quays of a broad canal, in which the muddy waterflowed onward. Over it the fresh streaming water was carried onarches; and quite at the top hung the tangled net of gas-pipes andtelegraph-wires.

In the distance lamps gleamed, like a reflection from theworld-city above. Every now and then a dull rumbling was heard. Thiscame from the heavy wagons rolling over the entrance bridges.

Whither had the Dryad come?

You have, no doubt, heard of the CATACOMBS? Now they are vanishingpoints in that new underground world- that wonder of the presentday- the sewers of Paris. The Dryad was there, and not in theworld's Exhibition in the Champ de Mars.

She heard exclamations of wonder and admiration.

"From here go forth health and life for thousands upon thousandsup yonder! Our time is the time of progress, with its manifoldblessings."

Such was the opinion and the speech of men; but not of thosecreatures who had been born here, and who built and dwelt here- of therats, namely, who were squeaking to one another in the clefts of acrumbling wall, quite plainly, and in a way the Dryad understood well.

A big old Father-Rat, with his tail bitten off, was relievinghis feelings in loud squeaks; and his family gave their tribute ofconcurrence to every word he said:

"I am disgusted with this man-mewing," he cried- "with theseoutbursts of ignorance. A fine magnificence, truly! all made up of gasand petroleum! I can't eat such stuff as that. Everything here is sofine and bright now, that one's ashamed of one's self, without exactlyknowing why. Ah, if we only lived in the days of tallow candles! andit does not lie so very far behind us. That was a romantic time, asone may say."

"What are you talking of there?" asked the Dryad. "I have neverseen you before. What is it you are talking about?"

"Of the glorious days that are gone," said the Rat- "of thehappy time of our great-grandfathers and great-grandmothers. Then itwas a great thing to get down here. That was a rat's nest quitedifferent from Paris. Mother Plague used to live here then; she killedpeople, but never rats. Robbers and smugglers could breathe freelyhere. Here was the meeting-place of the most interesting personages,whom one now only gets to see in the theatres where they actmelodrama, up above. The time of romance is gone even in our rat'snest; and here also fresh air and petroleum have broken in."

Thus squeaked the Rat; he squeaked in honor of the old time,when Mother Plague was still alive.

A carriage stopped, a kind of open omnibus, drawn by swift horses.The company mounted and drove away along the Boulevard deSebastopol, that is to say, the underground boulevard, over whichthe well-known crowded street of that name extended.

The carriage disappeared in the twilight; the Dryad disappeared,lifted to the cheerful freshness above. Here, and not below in thevaulted passages, filled with heavy air, the wonder work must be foundwhich she was to seek in her short lifetime. It must gleam brighterthan all the gas-flames, stronger than the moon that was justgliding past.

Yes, certainly, she saw it yonder in the distance, it gleamedbefore her, and twinkled and glittered like the evening star in thesky.

She saw a glittering portal open, that led to a little garden,where all was brightness and dance music. Colored lamps surroundedlittle lakes, in which were water-plants of colored metal, fromwhose flowers jets of water spurted up. Beautiful weeping willows,real products of spring, hung their fresh branches over these lakeslike a fresh, green, transparent, and yet screening veil. In thebushes burnt an open fire, throwing a red twilight over the quiet hutsof branches, into which the sounds of music penetrated- an eartickling, intoxicating music, that sent the blood coursing through theveins.

Beautiful girls in festive attire, with pleasant smiles on theirlips, and the light spirit of youth in their hearts- "Marys," withroses in their hair, but without carriage and postilion- flitted toand fro in the wild dance.

Where were the heads, where the feet? As if stung by tarantulas,they sprang, laughed, rejoiced, as if in their ecstacies they weregoing to embrace all the world.

The Dryad felt herself torn with them into the whirl of the dance.Round her delicate foot clung the silken boot, chestnut brown incolor, like the ribbon that floated from her hair down upon her bareshoulders. The green silk dress waved in large folds, but did notentirely hide the pretty foot and ankle.

Had she come to the enchanted Garden of Armida? What was thename of the place?

The name glittered in gas-jets over the entrance. It was"Mabille."

The soaring upwards of rockets, the splashing of fountains, andthe popping of champagne corks accompanied the wild bacchanticdance. Over the whole glided the moon through the air, clear, but witha somewhat crooked face.

A wild joviality seemed to rush through the Dryad, as though shewere intoxicated with opium. Her eyes spoke, her lips spoke, but thesound of violins and of flutes drowned the sound of her voice. Herpartner whispered words to her which she did not understand, nor do weunderstand them. He stretched out his arms to draw her to him, buthe embraced only the empty air.

The Dryad had been carried away, like a rose-leaf on the wind.Before her she saw a flame in the air, a flashing light high up on atower. The beacon light shone from the goal of her longing, shone fromthe red lighthouse tower of the Fata Morgana of the Champ de Mars.Thither she was carried by the wind. She circled round the tower;the workmen thought it was a butterfly that had come too early, andthat now sank down dying.

The moon shone bright, gas-lamps spread light around, throughthe halls, over the all-world's buildings scattered about, over therose-hills and the rocks produced by human ingenuity, from whichwaterfalls, driven by the power of "Master Bloodless," fell down.The caverns of the sea, the depths of the lakes, the kingdom of thefishes were opened here. Men walked as in the depths of the deep pond,and held converse with the sea, in the diving-bell of glass. The waterpressed against the strong glass walls above and on every side. Thepolypi, eel-like living creatures, had fastened themselves to thebottom, and stretched out arms, fathoms long, for prey. A big turbotwas making himself broad in front, quietly enough, but not withoutcasting some suspicious glances aside. A crab clambered over him,looking like a gigantic spider, while the shrimps wandered about inrestless haste, like the butterflies and moths of the sea.

In the fresh water grew water-lilies, nymphaea, and reeds; thegold-fishes stood up below in rank and file, all turning their headsone way, that the streaming water might flow into their mouths. Fatcarps stared at the glass wall with stupid eyes. They knew that theywere here to be exhibited, and that they had made the somewhattoilsome journey hither in tubs filled with water; and they thoughtwith dismay of the land-sickness from which they had suffered socruelly on the railway.

They had come to see the Exhibition, and now contemplated itfrom their fresh or salt-water position. They looked attentively atthe crowds of people who passed by them early and late. All thenations in the world, they thought, had made an exhibition of theirinhabitants, for the edification of the soles and haddocks, pike andcarp, that they might give their opinions upon the different kinds.

"Those are scaly animals" said a little slimy Whiting. "They puton different scales two or three times a day, and they emit soundswhich they call speaking. We don't put on scales, and we makeourselves understood in an easier way, simply by twitching the cornersof our mouths and staring with our eyes. We have a great manyadvantages over mankind."

"But they have learned swimming of us," remarked a well-educatedCodling. "You must know I come from the great sea outside. In thehot time of the year the people yonder go into the water; first theytake off their scales, and then they swim. They have learnt from thefrogs to kick out with their hind legs, and row with their forepaws. But they cannot hold out long. They want to be like us, but theycannot come up to us. Poor people!"

And the fishes stared. They thought that the whole swarm of peoplewhom they had seen in the bright daylight were still moving aroundthem; they were certain they still saw the same forms that had firstcaught their attention.

A pretty Barbel, with spotted skin, and an enviably round back,declared that the "human fry" were still there.

"I can see a well set-up human figure quite well," said theBarbel. "She was called 'contumacious lady,' or something of thatkind. She had a mouth and staring eyes, like ours, and a great balloonat the back of her head, and something like a shut-up umbrella infront; there were a lot of dangling bits of seaweed hanging about her.She ought to take all the rubbish off, and go as we do; then she wouldlook something like a respectable barbel, so far as it is possible fora person to look like one!"

"What's become of that one whom they drew away with the hook? Hesat on a wheel-chair, and had paper, and pen, and ink, and wrotedown everything. They called him a 'writer.'"

"They're going about with him still," said a hoary old maid of aCarp, who carried her misfortune about with her, so that she was quitehoarse. In her youth she had once swallowed a hook, and still swampatiently about with it in her gullet. "A writer? That means, as wefishes describe it, a kind of cuttle or ink-fish among men."

Thus the fishes gossipped in their own way; but in theartificial water-grotto the laborers were busy; who were obliged totake advantage of the hours of night to get their work done bydaybreak. They accompanied with blows of their hammers and withsongs the parting words of the vanishing Dryad.

"So, at any rate, I have seen you, you pretty gold-fishes," shesaid. "Yes, I know you;" and she waved her hand to them. "I have knownabout you a long time in my home; the swallow told me about you. Howbeautiful you are! how delicate and shining! I should like to kissevery one of you. You others, also. I know you all; but you do notknow me."

The fishes stared out into the twilight. They did not understand aword of it.

The Dryad was there no longer. She had been a long time in theopen air, where the different countries- the country of black bread,the codfish coast, the kingdom of Russia leather, and the banks ofeau-de-Cologne, and the gardens of rose oil- exhaled their perfumesfrom the world-wonder flower.

When, after a night at a ball, we drive home half asleep andhalf awake, the melodies still sound plainly in our ears; we hearthem, and could sing them all from memory. When the eye of themurdered man closes, the picture of what it saw last clings to itfor a time like a photographic picture.

So it was likewise here. The bustling life of day had not yetdisappeared in the quiet night. The Dryad had seen it; she knew,thus it will be repeated tomorrow.

The Dryad stood among the fragrant roses, and thought she knewthem, and had seen them in her own home. She also saw redpomegranate flowers, like those that little Mary had worn in herdark hair.

Remembrances from the home of her childhood flashed through herthoughts; her eyes eagerly drank in the prospect around, andfeverish restlessness chased her through the wonder-filled halls.

A weariness that increased continually, took possession of her.She felt a longing to rest on the soft Oriental carpets within, orto lean against the weeping willow without by the clear water. But forthe ephemeral fly there was no rest. In a few moments the day hadcompleted its circle.

Her thoughts trembled, her limbs trembled, she sank down on thegrass by the bubbling water.

"Thou wilt ever spring living from the earth," she saidmournfully. "Moisten my tongue- bring me a refreshing draught."

"I am no living water," was the answer. "I only spring upward whenthe machine wills it."

"Give me something of thy freshness, thou green grass," imploredthe Dryad; "give me one of thy fragrant flowers."

"We must die if we are torn from our stalks," replied theFlowers and the Grass.

"Give me a kiss, thou fresh stream of air- only a singlelife-kiss."

"Soon the sun will kiss the clouds red," answered the Wind;"then thou wilt be among the dead- blown away, as all the splendorhere will be blown away before the year shall have ended. Then I canplay again with the light loose sand on the place here, and whirlthe dust over the land and through the air. All is dust!"

The Dryad felt a terror like a woman who has cut asunder herpulse-artery in the bath, but is filled again with the love of life,even while she is bleeding to death. She raised herself, totteredforward a few steps, and sank down again at the entrance to a littlechurch. The gate stood open, lights were burning upon the altar, andthe organ sounded.

What music! Such notes the Dryad had never yet heard; and yet itseemed to her as if she recognized a number of well-known voices amongthem. They came deep from the heart of all creation. She thought sheheard the stories of the old clergyman, of great deeds, and of thecelebrated names, and of the gifts that the creatures of God mustbestow upon posterity, if they would live on in the world.

The tones of the organ swelled, and in their song there soundedthese words:

"Thy wishing and thy longing have torn thee, with thy roots,from the place which God appointed for thee. That was thy destruction,thou poor Dryad!"

The notes became soft and gentle, and seemed to die away in awail.

In the sky the clouds showed themselves with a ruddy gleam. TheWind sighed:

"Pass away, ye dead! now the sun is going to rise!"

The first ray fell on the Dryad. Her form was irradiated inchanging colors, like the soap-bubble when it is bursting andbecomes a drop of water; like a tear that falls and passes away like avapor.

Poor Dryad! Only a dew-drop, only a tear, poured upon the earth,and vanished away!

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE DUMB BOOK

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IN the high-road which led through a wood stood a solitaryfarm-house; the road, in fact, ran right through its yard. The sun wasshining and all the windows were open; within the house people werevery busy. In the yard, in an arbour formed by lilac bushes in fullbloom, stood an open coffin; thither they had carried a dead man,who was to be buried that very afternoon. Nobody shed a tear over him;his face was covered over with a white cloth, under his head theyhad placed a large thick book, the leaves of which consisted of foldedsheets of blotting-paper, and withered flowers lay between them; itwas the herbarium which he had gathered in various places and was tobe buried with him, according to his own wish. Every one of theflowers in it was connected with some chapter of his life.

"Who is the dead man?" we asked.

"The old student," was the reply. "They say that he was once anenergetic young man, that he studied the dead languages, and sangand even composed many songs; then something had happened to him,and in consequence of this he gave himself up to drink, body and mind.When at last he had ruined his health, they brought him into thecountry, where someone paid for his board and residence. He was gentleas a child as long as the sullen mood did not come over him; butwhen it came he was fierce, became as strong as a giant, and ran aboutin the wood like a chased deer. But when we succeeded in bringinghim home, and prevailed upon him to open the book with the dried-upplants in it, he would sometimes sit for a whole day looking at thisor that plant, while frequently the tears rolled over his cheeks.God knows what was in his mind; but he requested us to put the bookinto his coffin, and now he lies there. In a little while the lid willbe placed upon the coffin, and he will have sweet rest in the grave!"

The cloth which covered his face was lifted up; the dead man'sface expressed peace- a sunbeam fell upon it. A swallow flew withthe swiftness of an arrow into the arbour, turning in its flight,and twittered over the dead man's head.

What a strange feeling it is- surely we all know it- to lookthrough old letters of our young days; a different life rises up outof the past, as it were, with all its hopes and sorrows. How many ofthe people with whom in those days we used to be on intimate termsappear to us as if dead, and yet they are still alive- only we havenot thought of them for such a long time, whom we imagined we shouldretain in our memories for ever, and share every joy and sorrow withthem.

The withered oak leaf in the book here recalled the friend, theschoolfellow, who was to be his friend for life. He fixed the leafto the student's cap in the green wood, when they vowed eternalfriendship. Where does he dwell now? The leaf is kept, but thefriendship does no longer exist. Here is a foreign hothouse plant, tootender for the gardens of the North. It is almost as if its leavesstill smelt sweet! She gave it to him out of her own garden- anobleman's daughter.

Here is a water-lily that he had plucked himself, and watered withsalt tears- a lily of sweet water. And here is a nettle: what mayits leaves tell us? What might he have thought when he plucked andkept it? Here is a little snowdrop out of the solitary wood; here isan evergreen from the flower-pot at the tavern; and here is a simpleblade of grass.

The lilac bends its fresh fragrant flowers over the dead man'shead; the swallow passes again- "twit, twit;" now the men come withhammer and nails, the lid is placed over the dead man, while hishead rests on the dumb book- so long cherished, now closed for ever!

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

  THE ELF OF THE ROSE

   by Hans Christian Andersen

IN the midst of a garden grew a rose-tree, in full blossom, and inthe prettiest of all the roses lived an elf. He was such a littlewee thing, that no human eye could see him. Behind each leaf of therose he had a sleeping chamber. He was as well formed and as beautifulas a little child could be, and had wings that reached from hisshoulders to his feet. Oh, what sweet fragrance there was in hischambers! and how clean and beautiful were the walls! for they werethe blushing leaves of the rose.

During the whole day he enjoyed himself in the warm sunshine, flewfrom flower to flower, and danced on the wings of the flyingbutterflies. Then he took it into his head to measure how many stepshe would have to go through the roads and cross-roads that are onthe leaf of a linden-tree. What we call the veins on a leaf, he tookfor roads; ay, and very long roads they were for him; for before hehad half finished his task, the sun went down: he had commenced hiswork too late. It became very cold, the dew fell, and the wind blew;so he thought the best thing he could do would be to return home. Hehurried himself as much as he could; but he found the roses all closedup, and he could not get in; not a single rose stood open. The poorlittle elf was very much frightened. He had never before been out atnight, but had always slumbered secretly behind the warmrose-leaves. Oh, this would certainly be his death. At the other endof the garden, he knew there was an arbor, overgrown with beautifulhoney-suckles. The blossoms looked like large painted horns; and hethought to himself, he would go and sleep in one of these till themorning. He flew thither; but "hush!" two people were in the arbor,- ahandsome young man and a beautiful lady. They sat side by side, andwished that they might never be obliged to part. They loved each othermuch more than the best child can love its father and mother.

"But we must part," said the young man; "your brother does notlike our engagement, and therefore he sends me so far away onbusiness, over mountains and seas. Farewell, my sweet bride; for soyou are to me."

And then they kissed each other, and the girl wept, and gave him arose; but before she did so, she pressed a kiss upon it so ferventlythat the flower opened. Then the little elf flew in, and leaned hishead on the delicate, fragrant walls. Here he could plainly hearthem say, "Farewell, farewell;" and he felt that the rose had beenplaced on the young man's breast. Oh, how his heart did beat! Thelittle elf could not go to sleep, it thumped so loudly. The youngman took it out as he walked through the dark wood alone, and kissedthe flower so often and so violently, that the little elf was almostcrushed. He could feel through the leaf how hot the lips of theyoung man were, and the rose had opened, as if from the heat of thenoonday sun.

There came another man, who looked gloomy and wicked. He was thewicked brother of the beautiful maiden. He drew out a sharp knife, andwhile the other was kissing the rose, the wicked man stabbed him todeath; then he cut off his head, and buried it with the body in thesoft earth under the linden-tree.

"Now he is gone, and will soon be forgotten," thought the wickedbrother; "he will never come back again. He was going on a longjourney over mountains and seas; it is easy for a man to lose his lifein such a journey. My sister will suppose he is dead; for he cannotcome back, and she will not dare to question me about him."

Then he scattered the dry leaves over the light earth with hisfoot, and went home through the darkness; but he went not alone, as hethought,- the little elf accompanied him. He sat in a dry rolled-uplinden-leaf, which had fallen from the tree on to the wicked man'shead, as he was digging the grave. The hat was on the head now,which made it very dark, and the little elf shuddered with frightand indignation at the wicked deed.

It was the dawn of morning before the wicked man reached home;he took off his hat, and went into his sister's room. There lay thebeautiful, blooming girl, dreaming of him whom she loved so, and whowas now, she supposed, travelling far away over mountain and sea.Her wicked brother stopped over her, and laughed hideously, asfiends only can laugh. The dry leaf fell out of his hair upon thecounterpane; but he did not notice it, and went to get a littlesleep during the early morning hours. But the elf slipped out of thewithered leaf, placed himself by the ear of the sleeping girl, andtold her, as in a dream, of the horrid murder; described the placewhere her brother had slain her lover, and buried his body; and toldher of the linden-tree, in full blossom, that stood close by.

"That you may not think this is only a dream that I have toldyou," he said, "you will find on your bed a withered leaf."

Then she awoke, and found it there. Oh, what bitter tears sheshed! and she could not open her heart to any one for relief.

The window stood open the whole day, and the little elf couldeasily have reached the roses, or any of the flowers; but he could notfind it in his heart to leave one so afflicted. In the window stooda bush bearing monthly roses. He seated himself in one of the flowers,and gazed on the poor girl. Her brother often came into the room,and would be quite cheerful, in spite of his base conduct; so she darenot say a word to him of her heart's grief.

As soon as night came on, she slipped out of the house, and wentinto the wood, to the spot where the linden-tree stood; and afterremoving the leaves from the earth, she turned it up, and therefound him who had been murdered. Oh, how she wept and prayed thatshe also might die! Gladly would she have taken the body home withher; but that was impossible; so she took up the poor head with theclosed eyes, kissed the cold lips, and shook the mould out of thebeautiful hair.

"I will keep this," said she; and as soon as she had covered thebody again with the earth and leaves, she took the head and a littlesprig of jasmine that bloomed in the wood, near the spot where hewas buried, and carried them home with her. As soon as she was inher room, she took the largest flower-pot she could find, and inthis she placed the head of the dead man, covered it up with earth,and planted the twig of jasmine in it.

"Farewell, farewell," whispered the little elf. He could not anylonger endure to witness all this agony of grief, he therefore flewaway to his own rose in the garden. But the rose was faded; only a fewdry leaves still clung to the green hedge behind it.

"Alas! how soon all that is good and beautiful passes away,"sighed the elf.

After a while he found another rose, which became his home, foramong its delicate fragrant leaves he could dwell in safety. Everymorning he flew to the window of the poor girl, and always found herweeping by the flower pot. The bitter tears fell upon the jasminetwig, and each day, as she became paler and paler, the sprigappeared to grow greener and fresher. One shoot after another sproutedforth, and little white buds blossomed, which the poor girl fondlykissed. But her wicked brother scolded her, and asked her if she wasgoing mad. He could not imagine why she was weeping over thatflower-pot, and it annoyed him. He did not know whose closed eyes werethere, nor what red lips were fading beneath the earth. And one dayshe sat and leaned her head against the flower-pot, and the little elfof the rose found her asleep. Then he seated himself by her ear,talked to her of that evening in the arbor, of the sweet perfume ofthe rose, and the loves of the elves. Sweetly she dreamed, and whileshe dreamt, her life passed away calmly and gently, and her spirit waswith him whom she loved, in heaven. And the jasmine opened its largewhite bells, and spread forth its sweet fragrance; it had no other wayof showing its grief for the dead. But the wicked brother consideredthe beautiful blooming plant as his own property, left to him by hissister, and he placed it in his sleeping room, close by his bed, forit was very lovely in appearance, and the fragrance sweet anddelightful. The little elf of the rose followed it, and flew fromflower to flower, telling each little spirit that dwelt in them thestory of the murdered young man, whose head now formed part of theearth beneath them, and of the wicked brother and the poor sister. "Weknow it," said each little spirit in the flowers, "we know it, forhave we not sprung from the eyes and lips of the murdered one. We knowit, we know it," and the flowers nodded with their heads in a peculiarmanner. The elf of the rose could not understand how they could restso quietly in the matter, so he flew to the bees, who were gatheringhoney, and told them of the wicked brother. And the bees told it totheir queen, who commanded that the next morning they should go andkill the murderer. But during the night, the first after thesister's death, while the brother was sleeping in his bed, close towhere he had placed the fragrant jasmine, every flower cup opened, andinvisibly the little spirits stole out, armed with poisonous spears.They placed themselves by the ear of the sleeper, told him dreadfuldreams and then flew across his lips, and pricked his tongue withtheir poisoned spears. "Now have we revenged the dead," said they, andflew back into the white bells of the jasmine flowers. When themorning came, and as soon as the window was opened, the rose elf, withthe queen bee, and the whole swarm of bees, rushed in to kill him. Buthe was already dead. People were standing round the bed, and sayingthat the scent of the jasmine had killed him. Then the elf of the roseunderstood the revenge of the flowers, and explained it to the queenbee, and she, with the whole swarm, buzzed about the flower-pot. Thebees could not be driven away. Then a man took it up to remove it, andone of the bees stung him in the hand, so that he let the flower-potfall, and it was broken to pieces. Then every one saw the whitenedskull, and they knew the dead man in the bed was a murderer. And thequeen bee hummed in the air, and sang of the revenge of the flowers,and of the elf of the rose and said that behind the smallest leafdwells One, who can discover evil deeds, and punish them also.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE ELFIN HILL

   by Hans Christian Andersen

A FEW large lizards were running nimbly about in the clefts ofan old tree; they could understand one another very well, for theyspoke the lizard language.

"What a buzzing and a rumbling there is in the elfin hill," saidone of the lizards; "I have not been able to close my eyes for twonights on account of the noise; I might just as well have had thetoothache, for that always keeps me awake."

"There is something going on within there," said the other lizard;"they propped up the top of the hill with four red posts, tillcock-crow this morning, so that it is thoroughly aired, and theelfin girls have learnt new dances; there is something."

"I spoke about it to an earth-worm of my acquaintance," said athird lizard; "the earth-worm had just come from the elfin hill, wherehe has been groping about in the earth day and night. He has heard agreat deal; although he cannot see, poor miserable creature, yet heunderstands very well how to wriggle and lurk about. They expectfriends in the elfin hill, grand company, too; but who they are theearth-worm would not say, or, perhaps, he really did not know. All thewill-o'-the-wisps are ordered to be there to hold a torch dance, as itis called. The silver and gold which is plentiful in the hill willbe polished and placed out in the moonlight."

"Who can the strangers be?" asked the lizards; "what can thematter be? Hark, what a buzzing and humming there is!"

Just at this moment the elfin hill opened, and an old elfinmaiden, hollow behind, came tripping out; she was the old elf king'shousekeeper, and a distant relative of the family; therefore shewore an amber heart on the middle of her forehead. Her feet moved veryfast, "trip, trip;" good gracious, how she could trip right down tothe sea to the night-raven.

"You are invited to the elf hill for this evening," said she; "butwill you do me a great favor and undertake the invitations? youought to do something, for you have no housekeeping to attend to asI have. We are going to have some very grand people, conjurors, whohave always something to say; and therefore the old elf king wishes tomake a great display."

"Who is to be invited?" asked the raven.

"All the world may come to the great ball, even human beings, ifthey can only talk in their sleep, or do something after ourfashion. But for the feast the company must be carefully selected;we can only admit persons of high rank; I have had a dispute myselfwith the elf king, as he thought we could not admit ghosts. The mermanand his daughter must be invited first, although it may not beagreeable to them to remain so long on dry land, but they shall have awet stone to sit on, or perhaps something better; so I think they willnot refuse this time. We must have all the old demons of the firstclass, with tails, and the hobgoblins and imps; and then I think weought not to leave out the death-horse, or the grave-pig, or eventhe church dwarf, although they do belong to the clergy, and are notreckoned among our people; but that is merely their office, they arenearly related to us, and visit us very frequently."

"Croak," said the night-raven as he flew away with theinvitations.

The elfin maidens we're already dancing on the elf hill, andthey danced in shawls woven from moonshine and mist, which look verypretty to those who like such things. The large hall within the elfhill was splendidly decorated; the floor had been washed withmoonshine, and the walls had been rubbed with magic ointment, sothat they glowed like tulip-leaves in the light. In the kitchen werefrogs roasting on the spit, and dishes preparing of snail skins,with children's fingers in them, salad of mushroom seed, hemlock,noses and marrow of mice, beer from the marsh woman's brewery, andsparkling salt-petre wine from the grave cellars. These were allsubstantial food. Rusty nails and church-window glass formed thedessert. The old elf king had his gold crown polished up with powderedslate-pencil; it was like that used by the first form, and verydifficult for an elf king to obtain. In the bedrooms, curtains werehung up and fastened with the slime of snails; there was, indeed, abuzzing and humming everywhere.

"Now we must fumigate the place with burnt horse-hair and pig'sbristles, and then I think I shall have done my part," said the elfman-servant.

"Father, dear," said the youngest daughter, "may I now hear whoour high-born visitors are?"

"Well, I suppose I must tell you now," he replied; "two of mydaughters must prepare themselves to be married, for the marriagescertainly will take place. The old goblin from Norway, who lives inthe ancient Dovre mountains, and who possesses many castles built ofrock and freestone, besides a gold mine, which is better than all,so it is thought, is coming with his two sons, who are both seekinga wife. The old goblin is a true-hearted, honest, old Norwegiangraybeard; cheerful and straightforward. I knew him formerly, whenwe used to drink together to our good fellowship: he came here once tofetch his wife, she is dead now. She was the daughter of the king ofthe chalk-hills at Moen. They say he took his wife from chalk; I shallbe delighted to see him again. It is said that the boys areill-bred, forward lads, but perhaps that is not quite correct, andthey will become better as they grow older. Let me see that you knowhow to teach them good manners."

"And when are they coming?" asked the daughter.

"That depends upon wind and weather," said the elf king; "theytravel economically. They will come when there is the chance of aship. I wanted them to come over to Sweden, but the old man was notinclined to take my advice. He does not go forward with the times, andthat I do not like."

Two will-o'-the-wisps came jumping in, one quicker than the other,so of course, one arrived first. "They are coming! they are coming!"he cried.

"Give me my crown," said the elf king, "and let me stand in themoonshine."

The daughters drew on their shawls and bowed down to the ground.There stood the old goblin from the Dovre mountains, with his crown ofhardened ice and polished fir-cones. Besides this, he wore abear-skin, and great, warm boots, while his sons went with theirthroats bare and wore no braces, for they were strong men.

"Is that a hill?" said the youngest of the boys, pointing to theelf hill, "we should call it a hole in Norway."

"Boys," said the old man, "a hole goes in, and a hill standsout; have you no eyes in your heads?"

Another thing they wondered at was, that they were able withouttrouble to understand the language.

"Take care," said the old man, "or people will think you havenot been well brought up."

Then they entered the elfin hill, where the select and grandcompany were assembled, and so quickly had they appeared that theyseemed to have been blown together. But for each guest the neatest andpleasantest arrangement had been made. The sea folks sat at table ingreat water-tubs, and they said it was just like being at home. Allbehaved themselves properly excepting the two young northern goblins;they put their legs on the table and thought they were all right.

"Feet off the table-cloth!" said the old goblin. They obeyed,but not immediately. Then they tickled the ladies who waited at table,with the fir-cones, which they carried in their pockets. They took offtheir boots, that they might be more at ease, and gave them to theladies to hold. But their father, the old goblin, was verydifferent; he talked pleasantly about the stately Norwegian rocks, andtold fine tales of the waterfalls which dashed over them with aclattering noise like thunder or the sound of an organ, spreadingtheir white foam on every side. He told of the salmon that leaps inthe rushing waters, while the water-god plays on his golden harp. Hespoke of the bright winter nights, when the sledge bells areringing, and the boys run with burning torches across the smoothice, which is so transparent that they can see the fishes dart forwardbeneath their feet. He described everything so clearly, that those wholistened could see it all; they could see the saw-mills going, themen-servants and the maidens singing songs, and dancing a rattlingdance,- when all at once the old goblin gave the old elfin maiden akiss, such a tremendous kiss, and yet they were almost strangers toeach other.

Then the elfin girls had to dance, first in the usual way, andthen with stamping feet, which they performed very well; then followedthe artistic and solo dance. Dear me, how they did throw their legsabout! No one could tell where the dance begun, or where it ended, norindeed which were legs and which were arms, for they were all flyingabout together, like the shavings in a saw-pit! And then they spunround so quickly that the death-horse and the grave-pig became sickand giddy, and were obliged to leave the table.

"Stop!" cried the old goblin," is that the only house-keeping theycan perform? Can they do anything more than dance and throw abouttheir legs, and make a whirlwind?"

"You shall soon see what they can do," said the elf king. And thenhe called his youngest daughter to him. She was slender and fair asmoonlight, and the most graceful of all the sisters. She took awhite chip in her mouth, and vanished instantly; this was heraccomplishment. But the old goblin said he should not like his wife tohave such an accomplishment, and thought his boys would have thesame objection. Another daughter could make a figure like herselffollow her, as if she had a shadow, which none of the goblin folk everhad. The third was of quite a different sort; she had learnt in thebrew-house of the moor witch how to lard elfin puddings withglow-worms.

"She will make a good housewife," said the old goblin, and thensaluted her with his eyes instead of drinking her health; for he didnot drink much.

Now came the fourth daughter, with a large harp to play upon;and when she struck the first chord, every one lifted up the leftleg (for the goblins are left-legged), and at the second chord theyfound they must all do just what she wanted.

"That is a dangerous woman," said the old goblin; and the two sonswalked out of the hill; they had had enough of it. "And what can thenext daughter do?" asked the old goblin.

"I have learnt everything that is Norwegian," said she; "and Iwill never marry, unless I can go to Norway."

Then her youngest sister whispered to the old goblin, "That isonly because she has heard, in a Norwegian song, that when the worldshall decay, the cliffs of Norway will remain standing like monuments;and she wants to get there, that she may be safe; for she is so afraidof sinking."

"Ho! ho!" said the old goblin, "is that what she means? Well, whatcan the seventh and last do?"

"The sixth comes before the seventh," said the elf king, for hecould reckon; but the sixth would not come forward.

"I can only tell people the truth," said she. "No one cares forme, nor troubles himself about me; and I have enough to do to sew mygrave clothes."

So the seventh and last came; and what could she do? Why, shecould tell stories, as many as you liked, on any subject.

"Here are my five fingers," said the old goblin; "now tell me astory for each of them."

So she took him by the wrist, and he laughed till he nearlychoked; and when she came to the fourth finger, there was a goldring on it, as if it knew there was to be a betrothal. Then the oldgoblin said, "Hold fast what you have: this hand is yours; for Iwill have you for a wife myself."

Then the elfin girl said that the stories about the ring-fingerand little Peter Playman had not yet been told.

"We will hear them in the winter," said the old goblin, "andalso about the fir and the birch-trees, and the ghost stories, andof the tingling frost. You shall tell your tales, for no one overthere can do it so well; and we will sit in the stone rooms, where thepine logs are burning, and drink mead out of the goldendrinking-horn of the old Norwegian kings. The water-god has given metwo; and when we sit there, Nix comes to pay us a visit, and will singyou all the songs of the mountain shepherdesses. How merry we shallbe! The salmon will be leaping in the waterfalls, and dashingagainst the stone walls, but he will not be able to come in. It isindeed very pleasant to live in old Norway. But where are the lads?"

Where indeed were they? Why, running about the fields, and blowingout the will-o'-the-wisps, who so good-naturedly came and broughttheir torches.

"What tricks have you been playing?" said the old goblin. "Ihave taken a mother for you, and now you may take one of your aunts."

But the youngsters said they would rather make a speech anddrink to their good fellowship; they had no wish to marry. Then theymade speeches and drank toasts, and tipped their glasses, to show thatthey were empty. Then they took off their coats, and lay down on thetable to sleep; for they made themselves quite at home. But the oldgoblin danced about the room with his young bride, and exchanged bootswith her, which is more fashionable than exchanging rings.

"The cock is crowing," said the old elfin maiden who acted ashousekeeper; now we must close the shutters, that the sun may notscorch us."

Then the hill closed up. But the lizards continued to run up anddown the riven tree; and one said to the other, "Oh, how much I waspleased with the old goblin!"

"The boys pleased me better," said the earth-worm. But then thepoor miserable creature could not see.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE EMPEROR'S NEW SUIT

   by Hans Christian Andersen

MANY, many years ago lived an emperor, who thought so much ofnew clothes that he spent all his money in order to obtain them; hisonly ambition was to be always well dressed. He did not care for hissoldiers, and the theatre did not amuse him; the only thing, infact, he thought anything of was to drive out and show a new suit ofclothes. He had a coat for every hour of the day; and as one would sayof a king "He is in his cabinet," so one could say of him, "Theemperor is in his dressing-room."

The great city where he resided was very gay; every day manystrangers from all parts of the globe arrived. One day two swindlerscame to this city; they made people believe that they were weavers,and declared they could manufacture the finest cloth to be imagined.Their colours and patterns, they said, were not only exceptionallybeautiful, but the clothes made of their material possessed thewonderful quality of being invisible to any man who was unfit forhis office or unpardonably stupid.

"That must be wonderful cloth," thought the emperor. "If I were tobe dressed in a suit made of this cloth I should be able to find outwhich men in my empire were unfit for their places, and I coulddistinguish the clever from the stupid. I must have this cloth wovenfor me without delay." And he gave a large sum of money to theswindlers, in advance, that they should set to work without any lossof time. They set up two looms, and pretended to be very hard at work,but they did nothing whatever on the looms. They asked for thefinest silk and the most precious gold-cloth; all they got they didaway with, and worked at the empty looms till late at night.

"I should very much like to know how they are getting on withthe cloth," thought the emperor. But he felt rather uneasy when heremembered that he who was not fit for his office could not see it.Personally, he was of opinion that he had nothing to fear, yet hethought it advisable to send somebody else first to see how mattersstood. Everybody in the town knew what a remarkable quality thestuff possessed, and all were anxious to see how bad or stupid theirneighbours were.

"I shall send my honest old minister to the weavers," thoughtthe emperor. "He can judge best how the stuff looks, for he isintelligent, and nobody understands his office better than he."

The good old minister went into the room where the swindlers satbefore the empty looms. "Heaven preserve us!" he thought, and openedhis eyes wide, "I cannot see anything at all," but he did not sayso. Both swindlers requested him to come near, and asked him if he didnot admire the exquisite pattern and the beautiful colours, pointingto the empty looms. The poor old minister tried his very best, buthe could see nothing, for there was nothing to be seen. "Oh dear,"he thought, "can I be so stupid? I should never have thought so, andnobody must know it! Is it possible that I am not fit for my office?No, no, I cannot say that I was unable to see the cloth."

"Now, have you got nothing to say?" said one of the swindlers,while he pretended to be busily weaving.

"Oh, it is very pretty, exceedingly beautiful," replied the oldminister looking through his glasses. "What a beautiful pattern,what brilliant colours! I shall tell the emperor that I like the clothvery much."

"We are pleased to hear that," said the two weavers, and describedto him the colours and explained the curious pattern. The old ministerlistened attentively, that he might relate to the emperor what theysaid; and so he did.

Now the swindlers asked for more money, silk and gold-cloth, whichthey required for weaving. They kept everything for themselves, andnot a thread came near the loom, but they continued, as hitherto, towork at the empty looms.

Soon afterwards the emperor sent another honest courtier to theweavers to see how they were getting on, and if the cloth was nearlyfinished. Like the old minister, he looked and looked but could seenothing, as there was nothing to be seen.

"Is it not a beautiful piece of cloth?" asked the two swindlers,showing and explaining the magnificent pattern, which, however, didnot exist.

"I am not stupid," said the man. "It is therefore my goodappointment for which I am not fit. It is very strange, but I must notlet any one know it;" and he praised the cloth, which he did notsee, and expressed his joy at the beautiful colours and the finepattern. "It is very excellent," he said to the emperor.

Everybody in the whole town talked about the precious cloth. Atlast the emperor wished to see it himself, while it was still on theloom. With a number of courtiers, including the two who had alreadybeen there, he went to the two clever swindlers, who now worked ashard as they could, but without using any thread.

"Is it not magnificent?" said the two old statesmen who had beenthere before. "Your Majesty must admire the colours and thepattern." And then they pointed to the empty looms, for theyimagined the others could see the cloth.

"What is this?" thought the emperor, "I do not see anything atall. That is terrible! Am I stupid? Am I unfit to be emperor? Thatwould indeed be the most dreadful thing that could happen to me."

"Really," he said, turning to the weavers, "your cloth has ourmost gracious approval;" and nodding contentedly he looked at theempty loom, for he did not like to say that he saw nothing. All hisattendants, who were with him, looked and looked, and although theycould not see anything more than the others, they said, like theemperor, "It is very beautiful." And all advised him to wear the newmagnificent clothes at a great procession which was soon to takeplace. "It is magnificent, beautiful, excellent," one heard themsay; everybody seemed to be delighted, and the emperor appointed thetwo swindlers "Imperial Court weavers."

The whole night previous to the day on which the procession was totake place, the swindlers pretended to work, and burned more thansixteen candles. People should see that they were busy to finish theemperor's new suit. They pretended to take the cloth from the loom,and worked about in the air with big scissors, and sewed withneedles without thread, and said at last: "The emperor's new suit isready now."

The emperor and all his barons then came to the hall; theswindlers held their arms up as if they held something in theirhands and said: "These are the trousers!" "This is the coat!" and"Here is the cloak!" and so on. "They are all as light as a cobweb,and one must feel as if one had nothing at all upon the body; but thatis just the beauty of them."

"Indeed!" said all the courtiers; but they could not see anything,for there was nothing to be seen.

"Does it please your Majesty now to graciously undress," saidthe swindlers, "that we may assist your Majesty in putting on thenew suit before the large looking-glass?"

The emperor undressed, and the swindlers pretended to put thenew suit upon him, one piece after another; and the emperor lookedat himself in the glass from every side.

"How well they look! How well they fit!" said all. "What abeautiful pattern! What fine colours! That is a magnificent suit ofclothes!"

The master of the ceremonies announced that the bearers of thecanopy, which was to be carried in the procession, were ready.

"I am ready," said the emperor. "Does not my suit fit memarvellously?" Then he turned once more to the looking-glass, thatpeople should think he admired his garments.

The chamberlains, who were to carry the train, stretched theirhands to the ground as if they lifted up a train, and pretended tohold something in their hands; they did not like people to know thatthey could not see anything.

The emperor marched in the procession under the beautifulcanopy, and all who saw him in the street and out of the windowsexclaimed: "Indeed, the emperor's new suit is incomparable! What along train he has! How well it fits him!" Nobody wished to letothers know he saw nothing, for then he would have been unfit forhis office or too stupid. Never emperor's clothes were more admired.

"But he has nothing on at all," said a little child at last. "Goodheavens! listen to the voice of an innocent child," said the father,and one whispered to the other what the child had said. "But he hasnothing on at all," cried at last the whole people. That made a deepimpression upon the emperor, for it seemed to him that they wereright; but he thought to himself, "Now I must bear up to the end." Andthe chamberlains walked with still greater dignity, as if they carriedthe train which did not exist.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

THE FARM-YARD COCK AND THE WEATHER-COCK

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE were two cocks- one on the dung-hill, the other on the roof.They were both arrogant, but which of the two rendered most service?Tell us your opinion- we'll keep to ours just the same though.

The poultry yard was divided by some planks from another yard inwhich there was a dung-hill, and on the dung-hill lay and grew a largecucumber which was conscious of being a hot-bed plant.

"One is born to that," said the cucumber to itself. "Not all canbe born cucumbers; there must be other things, too. The hens, theducks, and all the animals in the next yard are creatures too. Now Ihave a great opinion of the yard cock on the plank; he is certainly ofmuch more importance than the weather-cock who is placed so high andcan't even creak, much less crow. The latter has neither hens norchicks, and only thinks of himself and perspires verdigris. No, theyard cock is really a cock! His step is a dance! His crowing is music,and wherever he goes one knows what a trumpeter is like! If he wouldonly come in here! Even if he ate me up stump, stalk, and all, and Ihad to dissolve in his body, it would be a happy death," said thecucumber.

In the night there was a terrible storm. The hens, chicks, andeven the cock sought shelter; the wind tore down the planks betweenthe two yards with a crash; the tiles came tumbling down, but theweather-cock sat firm. He did not even turn round, for he could not;and yet he was young and freshly cast, but prudent and sedate. Hehad been born old, and did not at all resemble the birds flying in theair- the sparrows, and the swallows; no, he despised them, thesemean little piping birds, these common whistlers. He admitted that thepigeons, large and white and shining like mother-o'-pearl, looked likea kind of weather-cock; but they were fat and stupid, and all theirthoughts and endeavours were directed to filling themselves with food,and besides, they were tiresome things to converse with. The birdsof passage had also paid the weather-cock a visit and told him offoreign countries, of airy caravans and robber stories that made one'shair stand on end. All this was new and interesting; that is, forthe first time, but afterwards, as the weather-cock found out, theyrepeated themselves and always told the same stories, and that'svery tedious, and there was no one with whom one could associate,for one and all were stale and small-minded.

"The world is no good!" he said. "Everything in it is so stupid."

The weather-cock was puffed up, and that quality would have madehim interesting in the eyes of the cucumber if it had known it, but ithad eyes only for the yard cock, who was now in the yard with it.

The wind had blown the planks, but the storm was over.

"What do you think of that crowing?" said the yard cock to thehens and chickens. "It was a little rough- it wanted elegance."

And the hens and chickens came up on the dung-hill, and the cockstrutted about like a lord.

"Garden plant!" he said to the cucumber, and in that one wordhis deep learning showed itself, and it forgot that he was peckingat her and eating it up. "A happy death!"

The hens and the chickens came, for where one runs the othersrun too; they clucked, and chirped, and looked at the cock, and wereproud that he was of their kind.

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" he crowed, "the chickens will grow up intogreat hens at once, if I cry it out in the poultry-yard of the world!"

And hens and chicks clucked and chirped, and the cock announceda great piece of news.

"A cock can lay an egg! And do you know what's in that egg? Abasilisk. No one can stand the sight of such a thing; people knowthat, and now you know it too- you know what is in me, and what achampion of all cocks I am!"

With that the yard cock flapped his wings, made his comb swell up,and crowed again; and they all shuddered, the hens and the littlechicks- but they were very proud that one of their number was such achampion of all cocks. They clucked and chirped till theweather-cock heard; he heard it; but he did not stir.

"Everything is very stupid," the weather-cock said to himself."The yard cock lays no eggs, and I am too lazy to do so; if I liked, Icould lay a wind-egg. But the world is not worth even a wind-egg.Everything is so stupid! I don't want to sit here any longer."

With that the weather-cock broke off; but he did not kill the yardcock, although the hens said that had been his intention. And whatis the moral? "Better to crow than to be puffed up and break off!

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

  THE FIR TREE

   by Hans Christian Andersen

FAR down in the forest, where the warm sun and the fresh airmade a sweet resting-place, grew a pretty little fir-tree; and yetit was not happy, it wished so much to be tall like its companions-the pines and firs which grew around it. The sun shone, and the softair fluttered its leaves, and the little peasant children passed by,prattling merrily, but the fir-tree heeded them not. Sometimes thechildren would bring a large basket of raspberries or strawberries,wreathed on a straw, and seat themselves near the fir-tree, and say,"Is it not a pretty little tree?" which made it feel more unhappy thanbefore. And yet all this while the tree grew a notch or joint tallerevery year; for by the number of joints in the stem of a fir-tree wecan discover its age. Still, as it grew, it complained, "Oh! how Iwish I were as tall as the other trees, then I would spread out mybranches on every side, and my top would over-look the wide world. Ishould have the birds building their nests on my boughs, and whenthe wind blew, I should bow with stately dignity like my tallcompanions." The tree was so discontented, that it took no pleasure inthe warm sunshine, the birds, or the rosy clouds that floated overit morning and evening. Sometimes, in winter, when the snow laywhite and glittering on the ground, a hare would come springing along,and jump right over the little tree; and then how mortified it wouldfeel! Two winters passed, and when the third arrived, the tree hadgrown so tall that the hare was obliged to run round it. Yet itremained unsatisfied, and would exclaim, "Oh, if I could but keep ongrowing tall and old! There is nothing else worth caring for in theworld!" In the autumn, as usual, the wood-cutters came and cut downseveral of the tallest trees, and the young fir-tree, which was nowgrown to its full height, shuddered as the noble trees fell to theearth with a crash. After the branches were lopped off, the trunkslooked so slender and bare, that they could scarcely be recognized.Then they were placed upon wagons, and drawn by horses out of theforest. "Where were they going? What would become of them?" Theyoung fir-tree wished very much to know; so in the spring, when theswallows and the storks came, it asked, "Do you know where those treeswere taken? Did you meet them?"

The swallows knew nothing, but the stork, after a littlereflection, nodded his head, and said, "Yes, I think I do. I metseveral new ships when I flew from Egypt, and they had fine masts thatsmelt like fir. I think these must have been the trees; I assure youthey were stately, very stately."

"Oh, how I wish I were tall enough to go on the sea," said thefir-tree. "What is the sea, and what does it look like?"

"It would take too much time to explain," said the stork, flyingquickly away.

"Rejoice in thy youth," said the sunbeam; "rejoice in thy freshgrowth, and the young life that is in thee."

And the wind kissed the tree, and the dew watered it with tears;but the fir-tree regarded them not.

Christmas-time drew near, and many young trees were cut down, someeven smaller and younger than the fir-tree who enjoyed neither restnor peace with longing to leave its forest home. These young trees,which were chosen for their beauty, kept their branches, and were alsolaid on wagons and drawn by horses out of the forest.

"Where are they going?" asked the fir-tree. "They are not tallerthan I am: indeed, one is much less; and why are the branches notcut off? Where are they going?"

"We know, we know," sang the sparrows; "we have looked in at thewindows of the houses in the town, and we know what is done with them.They are dressed up in the most splendid manner. We have seen themstanding in the middle of a warm room, and adorned with all sorts ofbeautiful things,- honey cakes, gilded apples, playthings, and manyhundreds of wax tapers."

"And then," asked the fir-tree, trembling through all itsbranches, "and then what happens?"

"We did not see any more," said the sparrows; "but this was enoughfor us."

"I wonder whether anything so brilliant will ever happen to me,"thought the fir-tree. "It would be much better than crossing thesea. I long for it almost with pain. Oh! when will Christmas behere? I am now as tall and well grown as those which were taken awaylast year. Oh! that I were now laid on the wagon, or standing in thewarm room, with all that brightness and splendor around me!Something better and more beautiful is to come after, or the treeswould not be so decked out. Yes, what follows will be grander and moresplendid. What can it be? I am weary with longing. I scarcely know howI feel."

"Rejoice with us," said the air and the sunlight. "Enjoy thine ownbright life in the fresh air."

But the tree would not rejoice, though it grew taller every day;and, winter and summer, its dark-green foliage might be seen in theforest, while passers by would say, "What a beautiful tree!"

A short time before Christmas, the discontented fir-tree was thefirst to fall. As the axe cut through the stem, and divided thepith, the tree fell with a groan to the earth, conscious of pain andfaintness, and forgetting all its anticipations of happiness, insorrow at leaving its home in the forest. It knew that it should neveragain see its dear old companions, the trees, nor the little bushesand many-colored flowers that had grown by its side; perhaps noteven the birds. Neither was the journey at all pleasant. The treefirst recovered itself while being unpacked in the courtyard of ahouse, with several other trees; and it heard a man say, "We only wantone, and this is the prettiest."

Then came two servants in grand livery, and carried the fir-treeinto a large and beautiful apartment. On the walls hung pictures,and near the great stove stood great china vases, with lions on thelids. There were rocking chairs, silken sofas, large tables, coveredwith pictures, books, and playthings, worth a great deal of money,- atleast, the children said so. Then the fir-tree was placed in a largetub, full of sand; but green baize hung all around it, so that noone could see it was a tub, and it stood on a very handsome carpet.How the fir-tree trembled! "What was going to happen to him now?" Someyoung ladies came, and the servants helped them to adorn the tree.On one branch they hung little bags cut out of colored paper, and eachbag was filled with sweetmeats; from other branches hung gilded applesand walnuts, as if they had grown there; and above, and all round,were hundreds of red, blue, and white tapers, which were fastened onthe branches. Dolls, exactly like real babies, were placed under thegreen leaves,- the tree had never seen such things before,- and at thevery top was fastened a glittering star, made of tinsel. Oh, it wasvery beautiful!

"This evening," they all exclaimed, "how bright it will be!""Oh, that the evening were come," thought the tree, "and the taperslighted! then I shall know what else is going to happen. Will thetrees of the forest come to see me? I wonder if the sparrows will peepin at the windows as they fly? shall I grow faster here, and keep onall these ornaments summer and winter?" But guessing was of verylittle use; it made his bark ache, and this pain is as bad for aslender fir-tree, as headache is for us. At last the tapers werelighted, and then what a glistening blaze of light the tree presented!It trembled so with joy in all its branches, that one of the candlesfell among the green leaves and burnt some of them. "Help! help!"exclaimed the young ladies, but there was no danger, for theyquickly extinguished the fire. After this, the tree tried not totremble at all, though the fire frightened him; he was so anxiousnot to hurt any of the beautiful ornaments, even while theirbrilliancy dazzled him. And now the folding doors were thrown open,and a troop of children rushed in as if they intended to upset thetree; they were followed more silently by their elders. For a momentthe little ones stood silent with astonishment, and then theyshouted for joy, till the room rang, and they danced merrily round thetree, while one present after another was taken from it.

"What are they doing? What will happen next?" thought the fir.At last the candles burnt down to the branches and were put out.Then the children received permission to plunder the tree.

Oh, how they rushed upon it, till the branches cracked, and had itnot been fastened with the glistening star to the ceiling, it musthave been thrown down. The children then danced about with theirpretty toys, and no one noticed the tree, except the children's maidwho came and peeped among the branches to see if an apple or a fig hadbeen forgotten.

"A story, a story," cried the children, pulling a little fat mantowards the tree.

"Now we shall be in the green shade," said the man, as he seatedhimself under it, "and the tree will have the pleasure of hearingalso, but I shall only relate one story; what shall it be?Ivede-Avede, or Humpty Dumpty, who fell down stairs, but soon got upagain, and at last married a princess."

"Ivede-Avede," cried some. "Humpty Dumpty," cried others, andthere was a fine shouting and crying out. But the fir-tree remainedquite still, and thought to himself, "Shall I have anything to do withall this?" but he had already amused them as much as they wished. Thenthe old man told them the story of Humpty Dumpty, how he fell downstairs, and was raised up again, and married a princess. And thechildren clapped their hands and cried, "Tell another, tellanother," for they wanted to hear the story of "Ivede-Avede;" but theyonly had "Humpty Dumpty." After this the fir-tree became quitesilent and thoughtful; never had the birds in the forest told suchtales as "Humpty Dumpty," who fell down stairs, and yet married aprincess.

"Ah! yes, so it happens in the world," thought the fir-tree; hebelieved it all, because it was related by such a nice man. "Ah!well," he thought, "who knows? perhaps I may fall down too, andmarry a princess;" and he looked forward joyfully to the next evening,expecting to be again decked out with lights and playthings, goldand fruit. "To-morrow I will not tremble," thought he; "I will enjoyall my splendor, and I shall hear the story of Humpty Dumpty again,and perhaps Ivede-Avede." And the tree remained quiet and thoughtfulall night. In the morning the servants and the housemaid came in."Now," thought the fir, "all my splendor is going to begin again." Butthey dragged him out of the room and up stairs to the garret, andthrew him on the floor, in a dark corner, where no daylight shone, andthere they left him. "What does this mean?" thought the tree, "what amI to do here? I can hear nothing in a place like this," and he hadtime enough to think, for days and nights passed and no one camenear him, and when at last somebody did come, it was only to putaway large boxes in a corner. So the tree was completely hidden fromsight as if it had never existed. "It is winter now," thought thetree, "the ground is hard and covered with snow, so that people cannotplant me. I shall be sheltered here, I dare say, until spring comes.How thoughtful and kind everybody is to me! Still I wish this placewere not so dark, as well as lonely, with not even a little hare tolook at. How pleasant it was out in the forest while the snow lay onthe ground, when the hare would run by, yes, and jump over me too,although I did not like it then. Oh! it is terrible lonely here."

"Squeak, squeak," said a little mouse, creeping cautiously towardsthe tree; then came another; and they both sniffed at the fir-tree andcrept between the branches.

"Oh, it is very cold," said the little mouse, "or else we shouldbe so comfortable here, shouldn't we, you old fir-tree?"

"I am not old," said the fir-tree, "there are many who are olderthan I am."

"Where do you come from? and what do you know?" asked the mice,who were full of curiosity. "Have you seen the most beautiful placesin the world, and can you tell us all about them? and have you been inthe storeroom, where cheeses lie on the shelf, and hams hang fromthe ceiling? One can run about on tallow candles there, and go in thinand come out fat."

"I know nothing of that place," said the fir-tree, "but I know thewood where the sun shines and the birds sing." And then the treetold the little mice all about its youth. They had never heard such anaccount in their lives; and after they had listened to it attentively,they said, "What a number of things you have seen? you must havebeen very happy."

"Happy!" exclaimed the fir-tree, and then as he reflected uponwhat he had been telling them, he said, "Ah, yes! after all those werehappy days." But when he went on and related all aboutChristmas-eve, and how he had been dressed up with cakes and lights,the mice said, "How happy you must have been, you old fir-tree."

"I am not old at all," replied the tree, "I only came from theforest this winter, I am now checked in my growth."

"What splendid stories you can relate," said the little mice.And the next night four other mice came with them to hear what thetree had to tell. The more he talked the more he remembered, andthen he thought to himself, "Those were happy days, but they maycome again. Humpty Dumpty fell down stairs, and yet he married theprincess; perhaps I may marry a princess too." And the fir-treethought of the pretty little birch-tree that grew in the forest, whichwas to him a real beautiful princess.

"Who is Humpty Dumpty?" asked the little mice. And then the treerelated the whole story; he could remember every single word, andthe little mice was so delighted with it, that they were ready to jumpto the top of the tree. The next night a great many more mice madetheir appearance, and on Sunday two rats came with them; but theysaid, it was not a pretty story at all, and the little mice werevery sorry, for it made them also think less of it.

"Do you know only one story?" asked the rats.

"Only one," replied the fir-tree; "I heard it on the happiestevening of my life; but I did not know I was so happy at the time."

"We think it is a very miserable story," said the rats. "Don't youknow any story about bacon, or tallow in the storeroom."

"No," replied the tree.

"Many thanks to you then," replied the rats, and they marched off.

The little mice also kept away after this, and the tree sighed,and said, "It was very pleasant when the merry little mice sat roundme and listened while I talked. Now that is all passed too. However, Ishall consider myself happy when some one comes to take me out of thisplace." But would this ever happen? Yes; one morning people came toclear out the garret, the boxes were packed away, and the tree waspulled out of the corner, and thrown roughly on the garret floor; thenthe servant dragged it out upon the staircase where the daylightshone. "Now life is beginning again," said the tree, rejoicing inthe sunshine and fresh air. Then it was carried down stairs andtaken into the courtyard so quickly, that it forgot to think ofitself, and could only look about, there was so much to be seen. Thecourt was close to a garden, where everything looked blooming. Freshand fragrant roses hung over the little palings. The linden-trees werein blossom; while the swallows flew here and there, crying, "Twit,twit, twit, my mate is coming,"- but it was not the fir-tree theymeant. "Now I shall live," cried the tree, joyfully spreading outits branches; but alas! they were all withered and yellow, and itlay in a corner amongst weeds and nettles. The star of gold paperstill stuck in the top of the tree and glittered in the sunshine. Inthe same courtyard two of the merry children were playing who haddanced round the tree at Christmas, and had been so happy. Theyoungest saw the gilded star, and ran and pulled it off the tree."Look what is sticking to the ugly old fir-tree," said the child,treading on the branches till they crackled under his boots. And thetree saw all the fresh bright flowers in the garden, and then lookedat itself, and wished it had remained in the dark corner of thegarret. It thought of its fresh youth in the forest, of the merryChristmas evening, and of the little mice who had listened to thestory of "Humpty Dumpty." "Past! past!" said the old tree; "Oh, hadI but enjoyed myself while I could have done so! but now it is toolate." Then a lad came and chopped the tree into small pieces, tilla large bundle lay in a heap on the ground. The pieces were placedin a fire under the copper, and they quickly blazed up brightly, whilethe tree sighed so deeply that each sigh was like a pistol-shot.Then the children, who were at play, came and seated themselves infront of the fire, and looked at it and cried, "Pop, pop." But at each"pop," which was a deep sigh, the tree was thinking of a summer day inthe forest; and of Christmas evening, and of "Humpty Dumpty," the onlystory it had ever heard or knew how to relate, till at last it wasconsumed. The boys still played in the garden, and the youngest worethe golden star on his breast, with which the tree had been adornedduring the happiest evening of its existence. Now all was past; thetree's life was past, and the story also,- for all stories must cometo an end at last.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

THE FLAX

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THE flax was in full bloom; it had pretty little blue flowers asdelicate as the wings of a moth, or even more so. The sun shone, andthe showers watered it; and this was just as good for the flax as itis for little children to be washed and then kissed by their mother.They look much prettier for it, and so did the flax.

"People say that I look exceedingly well," said the flax, "andthat I am so fine and long that I shall make a beautiful piece oflinen. How fortunate I am; it makes me so happy, it is such a pleasantthing to know that something can be made of me. How the sunshinecheers me, and how sweet and refreshing is the rain; my happinessoverpowers me, no one in the world can feel happier than I am."

"Ah, yes, no doubt," said the fern, "but you do not know the worldyet as well as I do, for my sticks are knotty;" and then it sung quitemournfully-

  "Snip, snap, snurre,

   Basse lurre:

   The song is ended."

"No, it is not ended," said the flax. "To-morrow the sun willshine, or the rain descend. I feel that I am growing. I feel that I amin full blossom. I am the happiest of all creatures."

Well, one day some people came, who took hold of the flax, andpulled it up by the roots; this was painful; then it was laid in wateras if they intended to drown it; and, after that, placed near a fireas if it were to be roasted; all this was very shocking. "We cannotexpect to be happy always," said the flax; "by experiencing evil aswell as good, we become wise." And certainly there was plenty ofevil in store for the flax. It was steeped, and roasted, and broken,and combed; indeed, it scarcely knew what was done to it. At last itwas put on the spinning wheel. "Whirr, whirr," went the wheel soquickly that the flax could not collect its thoughts. "Well, I havebeen very happy," he thought in the midst of his pain, "and must becontented with the past;" and contented he remained till he was put onthe loom, and became a beautiful piece of white linen. All the flax,even to the last stalk, was used in making this one piece. "Well, thisis quite wonderful; I could not have believed that I should be sofavored by fortune. The fern was not wrong with its song of

   'Snip, snap, snurre,

Basse lurre.'But the song is not ended yet, I am sure; it is only just beginning.How wonderful it is, that after all I have suffered, I am madesomething of at last; I am the luckiest person in the world- so strongand fine; and how white, and what a length! This is somethingdifferent to being a mere plant and bearing flowers. Then I had noattention, nor any water unless it rained; now, I am watched and takencare of. Every morning the maid turns me over, and I have ashower-bath from the watering-pot every evening. Yes, and theclergyman's wife noticed me, and said I was the best piece of linen inthe whole parish. I cannot be happier than I am now."

After some time, the linen was taken into the house, placedunder the scissors, and cut and torn into pieces, and then prickedwith needles. This certainly was not pleasant; but at last it was madeinto twelve garments of that kind which people do not like to name,and yet everybody should wear one. "See, now, then," said the flax; "Ihave become something of importance. This was my destiny; it isquite a blessing. Now I shall be of some use in the world, as everyoneought to be; it is the only way to be happy. I am now divided intotwelve pieces, and yet we are all one and the same in the whole dozen.It is most extraordinary good fortune."

Years passed away, and at last the linen was so worn it couldscarcely hold together. "It must end very soon," said the pieces toeach other; "we would gladly have held together a little longer, butit is useless to expect impossibilities." And at length they fell intorags and tatters, and thought it was all over with them, for they weretorn to shreds, and steeped in water, and made into a pulp, and dried,and they knew not what besides, till all at once they found themselvesbeautiful white paper. "Well, now, this is a surprise; a glorioussurprise too," said the paper. "I am now finer than ever, and Ishall be written upon, and who can tell what fine things I may havewritten upon me. This is wonderful luck!" And sure enough the mostbeautiful stories and poetry were written upon it, and only once wasthere a blot, which was very fortunate. Then people heard thestories and poetry read, and it made them wiser and better; for allthat was written had a good and sensible meaning, and a great blessingwas contained in the words on this paper.

"I never imagined anything like this," said the paper, "when I wasonly a little blue flower, growing in the fields. How could I fancythat I should ever be the means of bringing knowledge and joy toman? I cannot understand it myself, and yet it is really so. Heavenknows that I have done nothing myself, but what I was obliged to dowith my weak powers for my own preservation; and yet I have beenpromoted from one joy and honor to another. Each time I think that thesong is ended; and then something higher and better begins for me. Isuppose now I shall be sent on my travels about the world, so thatpeople may read me. It cannot be otherwise; indeed, it is more thanprobable; for I have more splendid thoughts written upon me, than Ihad pretty flowers in olden times. I am happier than ever."

But the paper did not go on its travels; it was sent to theprinter, and all the words written upon it were set up in type, tomake a book, or rather, many hundreds of books; for so many morepersons could derive pleasure and profit from a printed book, thanfrom the written paper; and if the paper had been sent around theworld, it would have been worn out before it had got half throughits journey.

"This is certainly the wisest plan," said the written paper; "Ireally did not think of that. I shall remain at home, and be held inhonor, like some old grandfather, as I really am to all these newbooks. They will do some good. I could not have wandered about as theydo. Yet he who wrote all this has looked at me, as every word flowedfrom his pen upon my surface. I am the most honored of all."

Then the paper was tied in a bundle with other papers, andthrown into a tub that stood in the washhouse.

"After work, it is well to rest," said the paper, "and a very goodopportunity to collect one's thoughts. Now I am able, for the firsttime, to think of my real condition; and to know one's self is trueprogress. What will be done with me now, I wonder? No doubt I shallstill go forward. I have always progressed hitherto, as I know quitewell."

Now it happened one day that all the paper in the tub was takenout, and laid on the hearth to be burnt. People said it could not besold at the shop, to wrap up butter and sugar, because it had beenwritten upon. The children in the house stood round the stove; forthey wanted to see the paper burn, because it flamed up so prettily,and afterwards, among the ashes, so many red sparks could be seenrunning one after the other, here and there, as quick as the wind.They called it seeing the children come out of school, and the lastspark was the schoolmaster. They often thought the last spark hadcome; and one would cry, "There goes the schoolmaster;" but the nextmoment another spark would appear, shining so beautifully. How theywould like to know where the sparks all went to! Perhaps we shall findout some day, but we don't know now.

The whole bundle of paper had been placed on the fire, and wassoon alight. "Ugh," cried the paper, as it burst into a brightflame; "ugh." It was certainly not very pleasant to be burning; butwhen the whole was wrapped in flames, the flames mounted up into theair, higher than the flax had ever been able to raise its littleblue flower, and they glistened as the white linen never could haveglistened. All the written letters became quite red in a moment, andall the words and thoughts turned to fire.

"Now I am mounting straight up to the sun," said a voice in theflames; and it was as if a thousand voices echoed the words; and theflames darted up through the chimney, and went out at the top. Thena number of tiny beings, as many in number as the flowers on theflax had been, and invisible to mortal eyes, floated above them.They were even lighter and more delicate than the flowers from whichthey were born; and as the flames were extinguished, and nothingremained of the paper but black ashes, these little beings danced uponit; and whenever they touched it, bright red sparks appeared.

"The children are all out of school, and the schoolmaster wasthe last of all," said the children. It was good fun, and they sangover the dead ashes,-

 "Snip, snap, snurre,

  Basse lure:

  The song is ended."

But the little invisible beings said, "The song is never ended;the most beautiful is yet to come."

But the children could neither hear nor understand this, norshould they; for children must not know everything.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

THE FLYING TRUNK

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once a merchant who was so rich that he could have pavedthe whole street with gold, and would even then have had enough fora small alley. But he did not do so; he knew the value of money betterthan to use it in this way. So clever was he, that every shilling heput out brought him a crown; and so he continued till he died. His soninherited his wealth, and he lived a merry life with it; he went toa masquerade every night, made kites out of five pound notes, andthrew pieces of gold into the sea instead of stones, making ducksand drakes of them. In this manner he soon lost all his money. At lasthe had nothing left but a pair of slippers, an old dressing-gown,and four shillings. And now all his friends deserted him, they couldnot walk with him in the streets; but one of them, who was verygood-natured, sent him an old trunk with this message, "Pack up!""Yes," he said, "it is all very well to say 'pack up,' "but he hadnothing left to pack up, therefore he seated himself in the trunk.It was a very wonderful trunk; no sooner did any one press on the lockthan the trunk could fly. He shut the lid and pressed the lock, whenaway flew the trunk up the chimney with the merchant's son in it,right up into the clouds. Whenever the bottom of the trunk cracked, hewas in a great fright, for if the trunk fell to pieces he would havemade a tremendous somerset over the trees. However, he got safely inhis trunk to the land of Turkey. He hid the trunk in the wood undersome dry leaves, and then went into the town: he could so this verywell, for the Turks always go about dressed in dressing-gowns andslippers, as he was himself. He happened to meet a nurse with a littlechild. "I say, you Turkish nurse," cried he, "what castle is that nearthe town, with the windows placed so high?"

"The king's daughter lives there," she replied; "it has beenprophesied that she will be very unhappy about a lover, andtherefore no one is allowed to visit her, unless the king and queenare present."

"Thank you," said the merchant's son. So he went back to the wood,seated himself in his trunk, flew up to the roof of the castle, andcrept through the window into the princess's room. She lay on the sofaasleep, and she was so beautiful that the merchant's son could nothelp kissing her. Then she awoke, and was very much frightened; but hetold her he was a Turkish angel, who had come down through the airto see her, which pleased her very much. He sat down by her side andtalked to her: he said her eyes were like beautiful dark lakes, inwhich the thoughts swam about like little mermaids, and he told herthat her forehead was a snowy mountain, which contained splendid hallsfull of pictures. And then he related to her about the stork whobrings the beautiful children from the rivers. These were delightfulstories; and when he asked the princess if she would marry him, sheconsented immediately.

"But you must come on Saturday," she said; "for then the kingand queen will take tea with me. They will be very proud when theyfind that I am going to marry a Turkish angel; but you must think ofsome very pretty stories to tell them, for my parents like to hearstories better than anything. My mother prefers one that is deep andmoral; but my father likes something funny, to make him laugh."

"Very well," he replied; "I shall bring you no other marriageportion than a story," and so they parted. But the princess gave him asword which was studded with gold coins, and these he could use.

Then he flew away to the town and bought a new dressing-gown,and afterwards returned to the wood, where he composed a story, soas to be ready for Saturday, which was no easy matter. It was readyhowever by Saturday, when he went to see the princess. The king, andqueen, and the whole court, were at tea with the princess; and hewas received with great politeness.

"Will you tell us a story?" said the queen,- "one that isinstructive and full of deep learning."

"Yes, but with something in it to laugh at," said the king.

"Certainly," he replied, and commenced at once, asking them tolisten attentively. "There was once a bundle of matches that wereexceedingly proud of their high descent. Their genealogical tree, thatis, a large pine-tree from which they had been cut, was at one timea large, old tree in the wood. The matches now lay between atinder-box and an old iron saucepan, and were talking about theiryouthful days. 'Ah! then we grew on the green boughs, and were asgreen as they; every morning and evening we were fed with diamonddrops of dew. Whenever the sun shone, we felt his warm rays, and thelittle birds would relate stories to us as they sung. We knew thatwe were rich, for the other trees only wore their green dress insummer, but our family were able to array themselves in green,summer and winter. But the wood-cutter came, like a greatrevolution, and our family fell under the axe. The head of the houseobtained a situation as mainmast in a very fine ship, and can sailround the world when he will. The other branches of the family weretaken to different places, and our office now is to kindle a light forcommon people. This is how such high-born people as we came to be in akitchen.'

"'Mine has been a very different fate,' said the iron pot, whichstood by the matches; 'from my first entrance into the world I havebeen used to cooking and scouring. I am the first in this house,when anything solid or useful is required. My only pleasure is to bemade clean and shining after dinner, and to sit in my place and have alittle sensible conversation with my neighbors. All of us, exceptingthe water-bucket, which is sometimes taken into the courtyard, livehere together within these four walls. We get our news from themarket-basket, but he sometimes tells us very unpleasant thingsabout the people and the government. Yes, and one day an old pot wasso alarmed, that he fell down and was broken to pieces. He was aliberal, I can tell you.'

"'You are talking too much,' said the tinder-box, and the steelstruck against the flint till some sparks flew out, crying, 'We want amerry evening, don't we?'

"'Yes, of course,' said the matches, 'let us talk about thosewho are the highest born.'

"'No, I don't like to be always talking of what we are,'remarked the saucepan; 'let us think of some other amusement; I willbegin. We will tell something that has happened to ourselves; thatwill be very easy, and interesting as well. On the Baltic Sea, nearthe Danish shore'-   "'What a pretty commencement!' said the plates; 'we shall alllike that story, I am sure.'

"'Yes; well in my youth, I lived in a quiet family, where thefurniture was polished, the floors scoured, and clean curtains putup every fortnight,'

"'What an interesting way you have of relating a story,' saidthe carpet-broom; 'it is easy to perceive that you have been a greatdeal in women's society, there is something so pure runs throughwhat you say.'

"'That is quite true,' said the water-bucket; and he made a springwith joy, and splashed some water on the floor.

"Then the saucepan went on with his story, and the end was as goodas the beginning.

"The plates rattled with pleasure, and the carpet-broom broughtsome green parsley out of the dust-hole and crowned the saucepan,for he knew it would vex the others; and he thought, 'If I crown himto-day he will crown me to-morrow.'

"'Now, let us have a dance,' said the fire-tongs; and then howthey danced and stuck up one leg in the air. The chair-cushion inthe corner burst with laughter when she saw it.

"'Shall I be crowned now?' asked the fire-tongs; so the broomfound another wreath for the tongs.

"'They were only common people after all,' thought the matches.The tea-urn was now asked to sing, but she said she had a cold, andcould not sing without boiling heat. They all thought this wasaffectation, and because she did not wish to sing excepting in theparlor, when on the table with the grand people.

"In the window sat an old quill-pen, with which the maid generallywrote. There was nothing remarkable about the pen, excepting that ithad been dipped too deeply in the ink, but it was proud of that.

"'If the tea-urn won't sing,' said the pen, 'she can leave italone; there is a nightingale in a cage who can sing; she has not beentaught much, certainly, but we need not say anything this eveningabout that.'

"'I think it highly improper,' said the tea-kettle, who waskitchen singer, and half-brother to the tea-urn, 'that a richforeign bird should be listened to here. Is it patriotic? Let themarket-basket decide what is right.'

"'I certainly am vexed,' said the basket; 'inwardly vexed, morethan any one can imagine. Are we spending the evening properly?Would it not be more sensible to put the house in order? If eachwere in his own place I would lead a game; this would be quite anotherthing.'

"'Let us act a play,' said they all. At the same moment the dooropened, and the maid came in. Then not one stirred; they allremained quite still; yet, at the same time, there was not a singlepot amongst them who had not a high opinion of himself, and of what hecould do if he chose.

"'Yes, if we had chosen,' they each thought, 'we might havespent a very pleasant evening.'

"The maid took the matches and lighted them; dear me, how theysputtered and blazed up!

"'Now then,' they thought, 'every one will see that we are thefirst. How we shine; what a light we give!' Even while they spoketheir light went out.

"What a capital story," said the queen, "I feel as if I werereally in the kitchen, and could see the matches; yes, you shall marryour daughter."

"Certainly," said the king, "thou shalt have our daughter." Theking said thou to him because he was going to be one of the family.The wedding-day was fixed, and, on the evening before, the wholecity was illuminated. Cakes and sweetmeats were thrown among thepeople. The street boys stood on tiptoe and shouted "hurrah," andwhistled between their fingers; altogether it was a very splendidaffair.

"I will give them another treat," said the merchant's son. So hewent and bought rockets and crackers, and all sorts of fire-works thatcould be thought of, packed them in his trunk, and flew up with itinto the air. What a whizzing and popping they made as they wentoff! The Turks, when they saw such a sight in the air, jumped sohigh that their slippers flew about their ears. It was easy to believeafter this that the princess was really going to marry a Turkishangel.

As soon as the merchant's son had come down in his flying trunk tothe wood after the fireworks, he thought, "I will go back into thetown now, and hear what they think of the entertainment." It wasvery natural that he should wish to know. And what strange thingspeople did say, to be sure! every one whom he questioned had adifferent tale to tell, though they all thought it very beautiful.

"'I saw the Turkish angel myself," said one; "he had eyes likeglittering stars, and a head like foaming water."

"He flew in a mantle of fire," cried another, "and lovely littlecherubs peeped out from the folds."

He heard many more fine things about himself, and that the nextday he was to be married. After this he went back to the forest torest himself in his trunk. It had disappeared! A spark from thefireworks which remained had set it on fire; it was burnt to ashes! Sothe merchant's son could not fly any more, nor go to meet his bride.She stood all day on the roof waiting for him, and most likely sheis waiting there still; while he wanders through the world tellingfairy tales, but none of them so amusing as the one he related aboutthe matches.

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE GARDEN OF PARADISE

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once a king's son who had a larger and more beautifulcollection of books than any one else in the world, and full ofsplendid copper-plate engravings. He could read and obtain informationrespecting every people of every land; but not a word could he find toexplain the situation of the garden of paradise, and this was justwhat he most wished to know. His grandmother had told him when hewas quite a little boy, just old enough to go to school, that eachflower in the garden of paradise was a sweet cake, that the pistilswere full of rich wine, that on one flower history was written, onanother geography or tables; so those who wished to learn theirlessons had only to eat some of the cakes, and the more they ate,the more history, geography, or tables they knew. He believed it allthen; but as he grew older, and learnt more and more, he became wiseenough to understand that the splendor of the garden of paradisemust be very different to all this. "Oh, why did Eve pluck the fruitfrom the tree of knowledge? why did Adam eat the forbidden fruit?"thought the king's son: "if I had been there it would never havehappened, and there would have been no sin in the world." The gardenof paradise occupied all his thoughts till he reached hisseventeenth year.

One day he was walking alone in the wood, which was his greatestpleasure, when evening came on. The clouds gathered, and the rainpoured down as if the sky had been a waterspout; and it was as dark asthe bottom of a well at midnight; sometimes he slipped over the smoothgrass, or fell over stones that projected out of the rocky ground.Every thing was dripping with moisture, and the poor prince had nota dry thread about him. He was obliged at last to climb over greatblocks of stone, with water spurting from the thick moss. He beganto feel quite faint, when he heard a most singular rushing noise,and saw before him a large cave, from which came a blaze of light.In the middle of the cave an immense fire was burning, and a noblestag, with its branching horns, was placed on a spit between thetrunks of two pine-trees. It was turning slowly before the fire, andan elderly woman, as large and strong as if she had been a man indisguise, sat by, throwing one piece of wood after another into theflames.

"Come in," she said to the prince; "sit down by the fire and dryyourself."

"There is a great draught here," said the prince, as he seatedhimself on the ground.

"It will be worse when my sons come home," replied the woman; "youare now in the cavern of the Winds, and my sons are the four Windsof heaven: can you understand that?"

"Where are your sons?" asked the prince.

"It is difficult to answer stupid questions," said the woman."My sons have plenty of business on hand; they are playing atshuttlecock with the clouds up yonder in the king's hall," and shepointed upwards.

"Oh, indeed," said the prince; "but you speak more roughly andharshly and are not so gentle as the women I am used to."

"Yes, that is because they have nothing else to do; but I amobliged to be harsh, to keep my boys in order, and I can do it,although they are so head-strong. Do you see those four sackshanging on the wall? Well, they are just as much afraid of thosesacks, as you used to be of the rat behind the looking-glass. I canbend the boys together, and put them in the sacks without anyresistance on their parts, I can tell you. There they stay, and darenot attempt to come out until I allow them to do so. And here comesone of them."

It was the North Wind who came in, bringing with him a cold,piercing blast; large hailstones rattled on the floor, andsnowflakes were scattered around in all directions. He wore a bearskindress and cloak. His sealskin cap was drawn over his ears, longicicles hung from his beard, and one hailstone after another rolledfrom the collar of his jacket.

"Don't go too near the fire," said the prince, "or your handsand face will be frost-bitten."

"Frost-bitten!" said the North Wind, with a loud laugh; "why frostis my greatest delight. What sort of a little snip are you, and howdid you find your way to the cavern of the Winds?"

"He is my guest," said the old woman, "and if you are notsatisfied with that explanation you can go into the sack. Do youunderstand me?"

That settled the matter. So the North Wind began to relate hisadventures, whence he came, and where he had been for a whole month."I come from the polar seas," he said; "I have been on the Bear'sIsland with the Russian walrus-hunters. I sat and slept at the helm oftheir ship, as they sailed away from North Cape. Sometimes when Iwoke, the storm-birds would fly about my legs. They are curious birds;they give one flap with their wings, and then on their outstretchedpinions soar far away.

"Don't make such a long story of it," said the mother of thewinds; "what sort of a place is Bear's Island?"

"A very beautiful place, with a floor for dancing as smooth andflat as a plate. Half-melted snow, partly covered with moss, sharpstones, and skeletons of walruses and polar-bears, lie all about,their gigantic limbs in a state of green decay. It would seem as ifthe sun never shone there. I blew gently, to clear away the mist,and then I saw a little hut, which had been built from the wood of awreck, and was covered with the skins of the walrus, the fleshy sideoutwards; it looked green and red, and on the roof sat a growlingbear. Then I went to the sea shore, to look after birds' nests, andsaw the unfledged nestlings opening their mouths and screaming forfood. I blew into the thousand little throats, and quickly stoppedtheir screaming. Farther on were the walruses with pig's heads, andteeth a yard long, rolling about like great worms.

"You relate your adventures very well, my son," said the mother,"it makes my mouth water to hear you.

"After that," continued the North Wind, "the hunting commenced.The harpoon was flung into the breast of the walrus, so that a smokingstream of blood spurted forth like a fountain, and besprinkled theice. Then I thought of my own game; I began to blow, and set my ownships, the great icebergs sailing, so that they might crush the boats.Oh, how the sailors howled and cried out! but I howled louder thanthey. They were obliged to unload their cargo, and throw theirchests and the dead walruses on the ice. Then I sprinkled snow overthem, and left them in their crushed boats to drift southward, andto taste salt water. They will never return to Bear's Island."

"So you have done mischief," said the mother of the Winds.

"I shall leave others to tell the good I have done," he replied."But here comes my brother from the West; I like him best of all,for he has the smell of the sea about him, and brings in a cold, freshair as he enters."

"Is that the little Zephyr?" asked the prince.

"Yes, it is the little Zephyr," said the old woman; "but he is notlittle now. In years gone by he was a beautiful boy; now that is allpast."

He came in, looking like a wild man, and he wore a slouched hat toprotect his head from injury. In his hand he carried a club, cutfrom a mahogany tree in the American forests, not a trifle to carry.

"Whence do you come?" asked the mother.

"I come from the wilds of the forests, where the thorny bramblesform thick hedges between the trees; where the water-snake lies in thewet grass, and mankind seem to be unknown."

"What were you doing there?"

"I looked into the deep river, and saw it rushing down from therocks. The water drops mounted to the clouds and glittered in therainbow. I saw the wild buffalo swimming in the river, but thestrong tide carried him away amidst a flock of wild ducks, whichflew into the air as the waters dashed onwards, leaving the buffalo tobe hurled over the waterfall. This pleased me; so I raised a storm,which rooted up old trees, and sent them floating down the river."

"And what else have you done?" asked the old woman.

"I have rushed wildly across the savannahs; I have stroked thewild horses, and shaken the cocoa-nuts from the trees. Yes, I havemany stories to relate; but I need not tell everything I know. Youknow it all very well, don't you, old lady?" And he kissed hismother so roughly, that she nearly fell backwards. Oh, he was, indeed,a wild fellow.

Now in came the South Wind, with a turban and a flowing Bedouincloak.

"How cold it is here!" said he, throwing more wood on the fire."It is easy to feel that the North Wind has arrived here before me."

"Why it is hot enough here to roast a bear," said the North Wind.

"You are a bear yourself," said the other.

"Do you want to be put in the sack, both of you?" said the oldwoman. "Sit down, now, on that stone, yonder, and tell me where youhave been."

"In Africa, mother. I went out with the Hottentots, who werelion-hunting in the Kaffir land, where the plains are covered withgrass the color of a green olive; and here I ran races with theostrich, but I soon outstripped him in swiftness. At last I came tothe desert, in which lie the golden sands, looking like the bottomof the sea. Here I met a caravan, and the travellers had just killedtheir last camel, to obtain water; there was very little for them, andthey continued their painful journey beneath the burning sun, and overthe hot sands, which stretched before them a vast, boundless desert.Then I rolled myself in the loose sand, and whirled it in burningcolumns over their heads. The dromedarys stood still in terror,while the merchants drew their caftans over their heads, and threwthemselves on the ground before me, as they do before Allah, theirgod. Then I buried them beneath a pyramid of sand, which covers themall. When I blow that away on my next visit, the sun will bleach theirbones, and travellers will see that others have been there beforethem; otherwise, in such a wild desert, they might not believe itpossible."

"So you have done nothing but evil," said the mother. "Into thesack with you;" and, before he was aware, she had seized the SouthWind round the body, and popped him into the bag. He rolled about onthe floor, till she sat herself upon him to keep him still.

"These boys of yours are very lively," said the prince.

"Yes," she replied, "but I know how to correct them, whennecessary; and here comes the fourth." In came the East Wind,dressed like a Chinese.

"Oh, you come from that quarter, do you?" said she; "I thought youhad been to the garden of paradise."

"I am going there to-morrow," he replied; "I have not been therefor a hundred years. I have just come from China, where I danced roundthe porcelain tower till all the bells jingled again. In the streetsan official flogging was taking place, and bamboo canes were beingbroken on the shoulders of men of every high position, from thefirst to the ninth grade. They cried, 'Many thanks, my fatherlybenefactor;' but I am sure the words did not come from their hearts,so I rang the bells till they sounded, 'ding, ding-dong.'"

"You are a wild boy," said the old woman; "it is well for you thatyou are going to-morrow to the garden of paradise; you always getimproved in your education there. Drink deeply from the fountain ofwisdom while you are there, and bring home a bottleful for me."

"That I will," said the East Wind; "but why have you put mybrother South in a bag? Let him out; for I want him to tell me aboutthe phoenix-bird. The princess always wants to hear of this birdwhen I pay her my visit every hundred years. If you will open thesack, sweetest mother, I will give you two pocketfuls of tea, greenand fresh as when I gathered it from the spot where it grew."

"Well, for the sake of the tea, and because you are my own boy,I will open the bag."

She did so, and the South Wind crept out, looking quite cast down,because the prince had seen his disgrace.

"There is a palm-leaf for the princess," he said. "The oldphoenix, the only one in the world, gave it to me himself. He hasscratched on it with his beak the whole of his history during thehundred years he has lived. She can there read how the old phoenix setfire to his own nest, and sat upon it while it was burning, like aHindoo widow. The dry twigs around the nest crackled and smoked tillthe flames burst forth and consumed the phoenix to ashes. Amidst thefire lay an egg, red hot, which presently burst with a loud report,and out flew a young bird. He is the only phoenix in the world, andthe king over all the other birds. He has bitten a hole in the leafwhich I give you, and that is his greeting to the princess."

"Now let us have something to eat," said the mother of theWinds. So they all sat down to feast on the roasted stag; and as theprince sat by the side of the East Wind, they soon became goodfriends.

"Pray tell me," said the prince, "who is that princess of whom youhave been talking! and where lies the garden of paradise?"

"Ho! ho!" said the East Wind, "would you like to go there? Well,you can fly off with me to-morrow; but I must tell you one thing- nohuman being has been there since the time of Adam and Eve. I supposeyou have read of them in your Bible."

"Of course I have," said the prince.

"Well," continued the East Wind, "when they were driven out of thegarden of paradise, it sunk into the earth; but it retained its warmsunshine, its balmy air, and all its splendor. The fairy queen livesthere, in the island of happiness, where death never comes, and all isbeautiful. I can manage to take you there to-morrow, if you will siton my back. But now don't talk any more, for I want to go to sleep;"and then they all slept.

When the prince awoke in the early morning, he was not a littlesurprised at finding himself high up above the clouds. He was seatedon the back of the East Wind, who held him faithfully; and they wereso high in the air that woods and fields, rivers and lakes, as theylay beneath them, looked like a painted map.

"Good morning," said the East Wind. "You might have slept on awhile; for there is very little to see in the flat country overwhich we are passing unless you like to count the churches; theylook like spots of chalk on a green board." The green board was thename he gave to the green fields and meadows.

"It was very rude of me not to say good-bye to your mother andyour brothers," said the prince.

"They will excuse you, as you were asleep," said the East Wind;and then they flew on faster than ever.

The leaves and branches of the trees rustled as they passed.When they flew over seas and lakes, the waves rose higher, and thelarge ships dipped into the water like diving swans. As darknesscame on, towards evening, the great towns looked charming; lights weresparkling, now seen now hidden, just as the sparks go out one afteranother on a piece of burnt paper. The prince clapped his hands withpleasure; but the East Wind advised him not to express hisadmiration in that manner, or he might fall down, and find himselfhanging on a church steeple. The eagle in the dark forests fliesswiftly; but faster than he flew the East Wind. The Cossack, on hissmall horse, rides lightly o'er the plains; but lighter still passedthe prince on the winds of the wind.

"There are the Himalayas, the highest mountains in Asia," said theEast Wind. "We shall soon reach the garden of paradise now."

Then, they turned southward, and the air became fragrant withthe perfume of spices and flowers. Here figs and pomegranates grewwild, and the vines were covered with clusters of blue and purplegrapes. Here they both descended to the earth, and stretchedthemselves on the soft grass, while the flowers bowed to the breath ofthe wind as if to welcome it. "Are we now in the garden ofparadise?" asked the prince.

"No, indeed," replied the East Wind; "but we shall be there verysoon. Do you see that wall of rocks, and the cavern beneath it, overwhich the grape vines hang like a green curtain? Through that cavernwe must pass. Wrap your cloak round you; for while the sun scorchesyou here, a few steps farther it will be icy cold. The bird flyingpast the entrance to the cavern feels as if one wing were in theregion of summer, and the other in the depths of winter."

"So this then is the way to the garden of paradise?" asked theprince, as they entered the cavern. It was indeed cold; but the coldsoon passed, for the East Wind spread his wings, and they gleamed likethe brightest fire. As they passed on through this wonderful cave, theprince could see great blocks of stone, from which water trickled,hanging over their heads in fantastic shapes. Sometimes it was sonarrow that they had to creep on their hands and knees, while at othertimes it was lofty and wide, like the free air. It had theappearance of a chapel for the dead, with petrified organs andsilent pipes. "We seem to be passing through the valley of death tothe garden of paradise," said the prince.

But the East Wind answered not a word, only pointed forwards toa lovely blue light which gleamed in the distance. The blocks of stoneassumed a misty appearance, till at last they looked like white cloudsin moonlight. The air was fresh and balmy, like a breeze from themountains perfumed with flowers from a valley of roses. A river, clearas the air itself, sparkled at their feet, while in its clear depthscould be seen gold and silver fish sporting in the bright water, andpurple eels emitting sparks of fire at every moment, while the broadleaves of the water-lilies, that floated on its surface, flickeredwith all the colors of the rainbow. The flower in its color of flameseemed to receive its nourishment from the water, as a lamp issustained by oil. A marble bridge, of such exquisite workmanshipthat it appeared as if formed of lace and pearls, led to the island ofhappiness, in which bloomed the garden of paradise. The East Wind tookthe prince in his arms, and carried him over, while the flowers andthe leaves sang the sweet songs of his childhood in tones so fulland soft that no human voice could venture to imitate. Within thegarden grew large trees, full of sap; but whether they were palm-treesor gigantic water-plants, the prince knew not. The climbing plantshung in garlands of green and gold, like the illuminations on themargins of old missals or twined among the initial letters. Birds,flowers, and festoons appeared intermingled in seeming confusion.Close by, on the grass, stood a group of peacocks, with radianttails outspread to the sun. The prince touched them, and found, to hissurprise, that they were not really birds, but the leaves of theburdock tree, which shone with the colors of a peacock's tail. Thelion and the tiger, gentle and tame, were springing about like playfulcats among the green bushes, whose perfume was like the fragrantblossom of the olive. The plumage of the wood-pigeon glistened likepearls as it struck the lion's mane with its wings; while theantelope, usually so shy, stood near, nodding its head as if it wishedto join in the frolic. The fairy of paradise next made her appearance.Her raiment shone like the sun, and her serene countenance beamed withhappiness like that of a mother rejoicing over her child. She wasyoung and beautiful, and a train of lovely maidens followed her,each wearing a bright star in her hair. The East Wind gave her thepalm-leaf, on which was written the history of the phoenix; and hereyes sparkled with joy. She then took the prince by the hand, andled him into her palace, the walls of which were richly colored,like a tulip-leaf when it is turned to the sun. The roof had theappearance of an inverted flower, and the colors grew deeper andbrighter to the gazer. The prince walked to a window, and saw whatappeared to be the tree of knowledge of good and evil, with Adam andEve standing by, and the serpent near them. "I thought they werebanished from paradise," he said.

The princess smiled, and told him that time had engraved eachevent on a window-pane in the form of a picture; but, unlike otherpictures, all that it represented lived and moved,- the leavesrustled, and the persons went and came, as in a looking-glass. Helooked through another pane, and saw the ladder in Jacob's dream, onwhich the angels were ascending and descending with outspread wings.All that had ever happened in the world here lived and moved on thepanes of glass, in pictures such as time alone could produce. Thefairy now led the prince into a large, lofty room with transparentwalls, through which the light shone. Here were portraits, each oneappearing more beautiful than the other- millions of happy beings,whose laughter and song mingled in one sweet melody: some of thesewere in such an elevated position that they appeared smaller thanthe smallest rosebud, or like pencil dots on paper. In the centre ofthe hall stood a tree, with drooping branches, from which hunggolden apples, both great and small, looking like oranges amid thegreen leaves. It was the tree of knowledge of good and evil, fromwhich Adam and Eve had plucked and eaten the forbidden fruit, and fromeach leaf trickled a bright red dewdrop, as if the tree were weepingtears of blood for their sin. "Let us now take the boat," said thefairy: "a sail on the cool waters will refresh us. But we shall notmove from the spot, although the boat may rock on the swellingwater; the countries of the world will glide before us, but we shallremain still."

It was indeed wonderful to behold. First came the lofty Alps,snow-clad, and covered with clouds and dark pines. The horn resounded,and the shepherds sang merrily in the valleys. The banana-trees benttheir drooping branches over the boat, black swans floated on thewater, and singular animals and flowers appeared on the distant shore.New Holland, the fifth division of the world, now glided by, withmountains in the background, looking blue in the distance. Theyheard the song of the priests, and saw the wild dance of the savage tothe sound of the drums and trumpets of bone; the pyramids of Egyptrising to the clouds; columns and sphinxes, overthrown and buried inthe sand, followed in their turn; while the northern lights flashedout over the extinguished volcanoes of the north, in fireworks nonecould imitate.

The prince was delighted, and yet he saw hundreds of otherwonderful things more than can be described. "Can I stay hereforever?" asked he.

"That depends upon yourself," replied the fairy. "If you do not,like Adam, long for what is forbidden, you can remain here always."

"I should not touch the fruit on the tree of knowledge," saidthe prince; there is abundance of fruit equally beautiful."

"Examine your own heart," said the princess, "and if you do notfeel sure of its strength, return with the East Wind who broughtyou. He is about to fly back, and will not return here for a hundredyears. The time will not seem to you more than a hundred hours, yeteven that is a long time for temptation and resistance. Every evening,when I leave you, I shall be obliged to say, 'Come with me,' and tobeckon to you with my hand. But you must not listen, nor move fromyour place to follow me; for with every step you will find yourpower to resist weaker. If once you attempted to follow me, youwould soon find yourself in the hall, where grows the tree ofknowledge, for I sleep beneath its perfumed branches. If you stoopedover me, I should be forced to smile. If you then kissed my lips,the garden of paradise would sink into the earth, and to you itwould be lost. A keen wind from the desert would howl around you; coldrain fall on your head, and sorrow and woe be your future lot."

"I will remain," said the prince.

So the East Wind kissed him on the forehead, and said, "Be firm;then shall we meet again when a hundred years have passed. Farewell,farewell." Then the East Wind spread his broad pinions, which shonelike the lightning in harvest, or as the northern lights in a coldwinter.

"Farewell, farewell," echoed the trees and the flowers.

Storks and pelicans flew after him in feathery bands, to accompanyhim to the boundaries of the garden.

"Now we will commence dancing," said the fairy; and when it isnearly over at sunset, while I am dancing with you, I shall make asign, and ask you to follow me: but do not obey. I shall be obliged torepeat the same thing for a hundred years; and each time, when thetrial is past, if you resist, you will gain strength, tillresistance becomes easy, and at last the temptation will be quiteovercome. This evening, as it will be the first time, I have warnedyou."

After this the fairy led him into a large hall, filled withtransparent lilies. The yellow stamina of each flower formed a tinygolden harp, from which came forth strains of music like the mingledtones of flute and lyre. Beautiful maidens, slender and graceful inform, and robed in transparent gauze, floated through the dance, andsang of the happy life in the garden of paradise, where death neverentered, and where all would bloom forever in immortal youth. As thesun went down, the whole heavens became crimson and gold, and tintedthe lilies with the hue of roses. Then the beautiful maidens offeredto the prince sparkling wine; and when he had drank, he felt happinessgreater than he had ever known before. Presently the background of thehall opened and the tree of knowledge appeared, surrounded by a haloof glory that almost blinded him. Voices, soft and lovely as hismother's sounded in his ears, as if she were singing to him, "Mychild, my beloved child." Then the fairy beckoned to him, and saidin sweet accents, "Come with me, come with me." Forgetting hispromise, forgetting it even on the very first evening, he rushedtowards her, while she continued to beckon to him and to smile. Thefragrance around him overpowered his senses, the music from theharps sounded more entrancing, while around the tree appeared millionsof smiling faces, nodding and singing. "Man should know everything;man is the lord of the earth." The tree of knowledge no longer wepttears of blood, for the dewdrops shone like glittering stars.

"Come, come," continued that thrilling voice, and the princefollowed the call. At every step his cheeks glowed, and the bloodrushed wildly through his veins. "I must follow," he cried; "it is nota sin, it cannot be, to follow beauty and joy. I only want to seeher sleep, and nothing will happen unless I kiss her, and that Iwill not do, for I have strength to resist, and a determined will."

The fairy threw off her dazzling attire, bent back the boughs, andin another moment was hidden among them.

"I have not sinned yet," said the prince, "and I will not;" andthen he pushed aside the boughs to follow the princess. She waslying already asleep, beautiful as only a fairy in the garden ofparadise could be. She smiled as he bent over her, and he saw tearstrembling out of her beautiful eyelashes. "Do you weep for me?" hewhispered. "Oh weep not, thou loveliest of women. Now do I begin tounderstand the happiness of paradise; I feel it to my inmost soul,in every thought. A new life is born within me. One moment of suchhappiness is worth an eternity of darkness and woe." He stooped andkissed the tears from her eyes, and touched her lips with his.

A clap of thunder, loud and awful, resounded through the tremblingair. All around him fell into ruin. The lovely fairy, the beautifulgarden, sunk deeper and deeper. The prince saw it sinking down inthe dark night till it shone only like a star in the distancebeneath him. Then he felt a coldness, like death, creeping over him;his eyes closed, and he became insensible.

When he recovered, a chilling rain was beating upon him, and asharp wind blew on his head. "Alas! what have I done?" he sighed; "Ihave sinned like Adam, and the garden of paradise has sunk into theearth." He opened his eyes, and saw the star in the distance, but itwas the morning star in heaven which glittered in the darkness.

Presently he stood up and found himself in the depths of theforest, close to the cavern of the Winds, and the mother of theWinds sat by his side. She looked angry, and raised her arm in the airas she spoke. "The very first evening!" she said. "Well, I expectedit! If you were my son, you should go into the sack."

"And there he will have to go at last," said a strong old man,with large black wings, and a scythe in his hand, whose name wasDeath. "He shall be laid in his coffin, but not yet. I will allowhim to wander about the world for a while, to atone for his sin, andto give him time to become better. But I shall return when he leastexpects me. I shall lay him in a black coffin, place it on my head,and fly away with it beyond the stars. There also blooms a garden ofparadise, and if he is good and pious he will be admitted; but ifhis thoughts are bad, and his heart is full of sin, he will sinkwith his coffin deeper than the garden of paradise has sunk. Once inevery thousand years I shall go and fetch him, when he will eitherbe condemned to sink still deeper, or be raised to a happier life inthe world beyond the stars."

THE END.

  1872

 FAIRY TALES OF HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN

 THE GIRL WHO TROD ON THE LOAF

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once a girl who trod on a loaf to avoid soiling hershoes, and the misfortunes that happened to her in consequence arewell known. Her name was Inge; she was a poor child, but proud andpresuming, and with a bad and cruel disposition. When quite a littlechild she would delight in catching flies, and tearing off theirwings, so as to make creeping things of them. When older, she wouldtake cockchafers and beetles, and stick pins through them. Then shepushed a green leaf, or a little scrap of paper towards their feet,and when the poor creatures would seize it and hold it fast, andturn over and over in their struggles to get free from the pin, shewould say, "The cockchafer is reading; see how he turns over theleaf." She grew worse instead of better with years, and,unfortunately, she was pretty, which caused her to be excused, whenshe should have been sharply reproved.

"Your headstrong will requires severity to conquer it," her motheroften said to her. "As a little child you used to trample on my apron,but one day I fear you will trample on my heart." And, alas! this fearwas realized.

Inge was taken to the house of some rich people, who lived at adistance, and who treated her as their own child, and dressed her sofine that her pride and arrogance increased.

When she had been there about a year, her patroness said to her,"You ought to go, for once, and see your parents, Inge."

So Inge started to go and visit her parents; but she only wantedto show herself in her native place, that the people might see howfine she was. She reached the entrance of the village, and saw theyoung laboring men and maidens standing together chatting, and her ownmother amongst them. Inge's mother was sitting on a stone to rest,with a fagot of sticks lying before her, which she had picked up inthe wood. Then Inge turned back; she who was so finely dressed shefelt ashamed of her mother, a poorly clad woman, who picked up wood inthe forest. She did not turn back out of pity for her mother'spoverty, but from pride.

Another half-year went by, and her mistress said, "you ought to gohome again, and visit your parents, Inge, and I will give you alarge wheaten loaf to take to them, they will be glad to see you, I amsure."

So Inge put on her best clothes, and her new shoes, drew her dressup around her, and set out, stepping very carefully, that she might beclean and neat about the feet, and there was nothing wrong in doingso. But when she came to the place where the footpath led across themoor, she found small pools of water, and a great deal of mud, soshe threw the loaf into the mud, and trod upon it, that she might passwithout wetting her feet. But as she stood with one foot on the loafand the other lifted up to step forward, the loaf began to sinkunder her, lower and lower, till she disappeared altogether, andonly a few bubbles on the surface of the muddy pool remained to showwhere she had sunk. And this is the story.

But where did Inge go? She sank into the ground, and went downto the Marsh Woman, who is always brewing there.

The Marsh Woman is related to the elf maidens, who are well-known,for songs are sung and pictures painted about them. But of the MarshWoman nothing is known, excepting that when a mist arises from themeadows, in summer time, it is because she is brewing beneath them. Tothe Marsh Woman's brewery Inge sunk down to a place which no one canendure for long. A heap of mud is a palace compared with the MarshWoman's brewery; and as Inge fell she shuddered in every limb, andsoon became cold and stiff as marble. Her foot was still fastened tothe loaf, which bowed her down as a golden ear of corn bends the stem.

An evil spirit soon took possession of Inge, and carried her toa still worse place, in which she saw crowds of unhappy people,waiting in a state of agony for the gates of mercy to be opened tothem, and in every heart was a miserable and eternal feeling ofunrest. It would take too much time to describe the various torturesthese people suffered, but Inge's punishment consisted in standingthere as a statue, with her foot fastened to the loaf. She couldmove her eyes about, and see all the misery around her, but shecould not turn her head; and when she saw the people looking at hershe thought they were admiring her pretty face and fine clothes, forshe was still vain and proud. But she had forgotten how soiled herclothes had become while in the Marsh Woman's brewery, and that theywere covered with mud; a snake had also fastened itself in her hair,and hung down her back, while from each fold in her dress a great toadpeeped out and croaked like an asthmatic poodle. Worse than all wasthe terrible hunger that tormented her, and she could not stoop tobreak off a piece of the loaf on which she stood. No; her back was toostiff, and her whole body like a pillar of stone. And then camecreeping over her face and eyes flies without wings; she winked andblinked, but they could not fly away, for their wings had beenpulled off; this, added to the hunger she felt, was horrible torture.

"If this lasts much longer," she said, "I shall not be able tobear it." But it did last, and she had to bear it, without beingable to help herself.

A tear, followed by many scalding tears, fell upon her head, androlled over her face and neck, down to the loaf on which she stood.Who could be weeping for Inge? She had a mother in the world still,and the tears of sorrow which a mother sheds for her child will alwaysfind their way to the child's heart, but they often increase thetorment instead of being a relief. And Inge could hear all that wassaid about her in the world she had left, and every one seemed cruelto her. The sin she had committed in treading on the loaf was known onearth, for she had been seen by the cowherd from the hill, when shewas crossing the marsh and had disappeared.

When her mother wept and exclaimed, "Ah, Inge! what grief thouhast caused thy mother" she would say, "Oh that I had never been born!My mother's tears are useless now."

And then the words of the kind people who had adopted her cameto her ears, when they said, "Inge was a sinful girl, who did notvalue the gifts of God, but trampled them under her feet."

"Ah," thought Inge, "they should have punished me, and drivenall my naughty tempers out of me."

A song was made about "The girl who trod on a loaf to keep hershoes from being soiled," and this song was sung everywhere. The storyof her sin was also told to the little children, and they called her"wicked Inge," and said she was so naughty that she ought to bepunished. Inge heard all this, and her heart became hardened andfull of bitterness.

But one day, while hunger and grief were gnawing in her hollowframe, she heard a little, innocent child, while listening to the taleof the vain, haughty Inge, burst into tears and exclaim, "But will shenever come up again?"

And she heard the reply, "No, she will never come up again."

"But if she were to say she was sorry, and ask pardon, and promisenever to do so again?" asked the little one.

"Yes, then she might come; but she will not beg pardon," was theanswer.

"Oh, I wish she would!" said the child, who was quite unhappyabout it. "I should be so glad. I would give up my doll and all myplaythings, if she could only come here again. Poor Inge! it is sodreadful for her."

These pitying words penetrated to Inge's inmost heart, andseemed to do her good. It was the first time any one had said, "PoorInge!" without saying something about her faults. A little innocentchild was weeping, and praying for mercy for her. It made her feelquite strange, and she would gladly have wept herself, and it added toher torment to find she could not do so. And while she thus sufferedin a place where nothing changed, years passed away on earth, andshe heard her name less frequently mentioned. But one day a sighreached her ear, and the words, "Inge! Inge! what a grief thou hastbeen to me! I said it would be so." It was the last sigh of herdying mother.

After this, Inge heard her kind mistress say, "Ah, poor Inge!shall I ever see thee again? Perhaps I may, for we know not what mayhappen in the future." But Inge knew right well that her mistresswould never come to that dreadful place.

Time-passed- a long bitter time- then Inge heard her namepronounced once more, and saw what seemed two bright stars shiningabove her. They were two gentle eyes closing on earth. Many yearshad passed since the little girl had lamented and wept about "poorInge." That child was now an old woman, whom God was taking toHimself. In the last hour of existence the events of a whole lifeoften appear before us; and this hour the old woman remembered how,when a child, she had shed tears over the story of Inge, and sheprayed for her now. As the eyes of the old woman closed to earth,the eyes of the soul opened upon the hidden things of eternity, andthen she, in whose last thoughts Inge had been so vividly present, sawhow deeply the poor girl had sunk. She burst into tears at thesight, and in heaven, as she had done when a little child on earth,she wept and prayed for poor Inge. Her tears and her prayers echoedthrough the dark void that surrounded the tormented captive soul,and the unexpected mercy was obtained for it through an angel's tears.As in thought Inge seemed to act over again every sin she hadcommitted on earth, she trembled, and tears she had never yet beenable to weep rushed to her eyes. It seemed impossible that the gatesof mercy could ever be opened to her; but while she acknowledgedthis in deep penitence, a beam of radiant light shot suddenly into thedepths upon her. More powerful than the sunbeam that dissolves the manof snow which the children have raised, more quickly than thesnowflake melts and becomes a drop of water on the warm lips of achild, was the stony form of Inge changed, and as a little bird shesoared, with the speed of lightning, upward to the world of mortals. Abird that felt timid and shy to all things around it, that seemed toshrink with shame from meeting any living creature, and hurriedlysought to conceal itself in a dark corner of an old ruined wall; thereit sat cowering and unable to utter a sound, for it was voiceless. Yethow quickly the little bird discovered the beauty of everything aroundit. The sweet, fresh air; the soft radiance of the moon, as itslight spread over the earth; the fragrance which exhaled from bush andtree, made it feel happy as it sat there clothed in its fresh,bright plumage. All creation seemed to speak of beneficence andlove. The bird wanted to give utterance to thoughts that stirred inhis breast, as the cuckoo and the nightingale in the spring, but itcould not. Yet in heaven can be heard the song of praise, even froma worm; and the notes trembling in the breast of the bird were asaudible to Heaven even as the psalms of David before they hadfashioned themselves into words and song.

Christmas-time drew near, and a peasant who dwelt close by the oldwall stuck up a pole with some ears of corn fastened to the top,that the birds of heaven might have feast, and rejoice in the happy,blessed time. And on Christmas morning the sun arose and shone uponthe ears of corn, which were quickly surrounded by a number oftwittering birds. Then, from a hole in the wall, gushed forth insong the swelling thoughts of the bird as he issued from his hidingplace to perform his first good deed on earth,- and in heaven it waswell known who that bird was.

The winter was very hard; the ponds were covered with ice, andthere was very little food for either the beasts of the field or thebirds of the air. Our little bird flew away into the public roads, andfound here and there, in the ruts of the sledges, a grain of corn, andat the halting places some crumbs. Of these he ate only a few, buthe called around him the other birds and the hungry sparrows, thatthey too might have food. He flew into the towns, and looked about,and wherever a kind hand had strewed bread on the window-sill forthe birds, he only ate a single crumb himself, and gave all the restto the rest of the other birds. In the course of the winter the birdhad in this way collected many crumbs and given them to other birds,till they equalled the weight of the loaf on which Inge had trod tokeep her shoes clean; and when the last bread-crumb had been found andgiven, the gray wings of the bird became white, and spreadthemselves out for flight.

"See, yonder is a sea-gull!" cried the children, when they saw thewhite bird, as it dived into the sea, and rose again into the clearsunlight, white and glittering. But no one could tell whither itwent then although some declared it flew straight to the sun.

THE END.

  1872

  THE GOBLIN AND THE HUCKSTER

   by Hans Christian Andersen

THERE was once a regular student, who lived in a garret, and hadno possessions. And there was also a regular huckster, to whom thehouse belonged, and who occupied the ground floor. A goblin lived withthe huckster, because at Christmas he always had a large dish fullof jam, with a great piece of butter in the middle. The huckster couldafford this; and therefore the goblin remained with the huckster,which was very cunning of him.

One evening the student came into the shop through the back doorto buy candles and cheese for himself, he had no one to send, andtherefore he came himself; he obtained what he wished, and then thehuckster and his wife nodded good evening to him, and she was awoman who could do more than merely nod, for she had usually plenty tosay for herself. The student nodded in return as he turned to leave,then suddenly stopped, and began reading the piece of paper in whichthe cheese was wrapped. It was a leaf torn out of an old book, abook that ought not to have been torn up, for it was full of poetry.

"Yonder lies some more of the same sort," said the huckster: "Igave an old woman a few coffee berries for it; you shall have the restfor sixpence, if you will."

"Indeed I will," said the student; "give me the book instead ofthe cheese; I can eat my bread and butter without cheese. It wouldbe a sin to tear up a book like this. You are a clever man; and apractical man; but you understand no more about poetry than thatcask yonder."

This was a very rude speech, especially against the cask; butthe huckster and the student both laughed, for it was only said infun. But the goblin felt very angry that any man should venture to saysuch things to a huckster who was a householder and sold the bestbutter. As soon as it was night, and the shop closed, and every one inbed except the student, the goblin stepped softly into the bedroomwhere the huckster's wife slept, and took away her tongue, which ofcourse, she did not then want. Whatever object in the room he placedhis tongue upon immediately received voice and speech, and was able toexpress its thoughts and feelings as readily as the lady herself coulddo. It could only be used by one object at a time, which was a goodthing, as a number speaking at once would have caused great confusion.The goblin laid the tongue upon the cask, in which lay a quantity ofold newspapers.

"Is it really true," he asked, that you do not know what poetryis?"

"Of course I know," replied the cask: "poetry is something thatalways stand in the corner of a newspaper, and is sometimes cut out;and I may venture to affirm that I have more of it in me than thestudent has, and I am only a poor tub of the huckster's."

Then the goblin placed the tongue on the coffee mill; and how itdid go to be sure! Then he put it on the butter tub and the cashbox, and they all expressed the same opinion as the waste-paper tub;and a majority must always be respected.

"Now I shall go and tell the student," said the goblin; and withthese words he went quietly up the back stairs to the garret where thestudent lived. He had a candle burning still, and the goblin peepedthrough the keyhole and saw that he was reading in the torn book,which he had brought out of the shop. But how light the room was! Fromthe book shot forth a ray of light which grew broad and full, like thestem of a tree, from which bright rays spread upward and over thestudent's head. Each leaf was fresh, and each flower was like abeautiful female head; some with dark and sparkling eyes, and otherswith eyes that were wonderfully blue and clear. The fruit gleamed likestars, and the room was filled with sounds of beautiful music. Thelittle goblin had never imagined, much less seen or heard of, anysight so glorious as this. He stood still on tiptoe, peeping in,till the light went out in the garret. The student no doubt hadblown out his candle and gone to bed; but the little goblin remainedstanding there nevertheless, and listening to the music which stillsounded on, soft and beautiful, a sweet cradle-song for the student,who had lain down to rest."

"This is a wonderful place," said the goblin; "I never expectedsuch a thing. I should like to stay here with the student;" and thelittle man thought it over, for he was a sensible little spirit. Atlast he sighed, "but the student has no jam!" So he went down stairsagain into the huckster's shop, and it was a good thing he got backwhen he did, for the cask had almost worn out the lady's tongue; hehad given a description of all that he contained on one side, andwas just about to turn himself over to the other side to describe whatwas there, when the goblin entered and restored the tongue to thelady. But from that time forward, the whole shop, from the cash boxdown to the pinewood logs, formed their opinions from that of thecask; and they all had such confidence in him, and treated him with somuch respect, that when the huckster read the criticisms ontheatricals and art of an evening, they fancied it must all comefrom the cask.

But after what he had seen, the goblin could no longer sit andlisten quietly to the wisdom and understanding down stairs; so, assoon as the evening light glimmered in the garret, he took courage,for it seemed to him as if the rays of light were strong cables,drawing him up, and obliging him to go and peep through the keyhole;and, while there, a feeling of vastness came over him such as weexperience by the ever-moving sea, when the storm breaks forth; and itbrought tears into his eyes. He did not himself know why he wept,yet a kind of pleasant feeling mingled with his tears. "Howwonderfully glorious it would be to sit with the student under sucha tree;" but that was out of the question, he must be content tolook through the keyhole, and be thankful for even that.

There he stood on the old landing, with the autumn wind blowingdown upon him through the trap-door. It was very cold; but thelittle creature did not really feel it, till the light in the garretwent out, and the tones of music died away. Then how he shivered,and crept down stairs again to his warm corner, where it felthome-like and comfortable. And when Christmas came again, andbrought the dish of jam and the great lump of butter, he liked thehuckster best of all.

Soon after, in the middle of the night, the goblin was awoke bya terrible noise and knocking against the window shutters and thehouse doors, and by the sound of the watchman's horn; for a great firehad broken out, and the whole street appeared full of flames. Was itin their house, or a neighbor's? No one could tell, for terror hadseized upon all. The huckster's wife was so bewildered that she tookher gold ear-rings out of her ears and put them in her pocket, thatshe might save something at least. The huckster ran to get hisbusiness papers, and the servant resolved to save her blue silkmantle, which she had managed to buy. Each wished to keep the bestthings they had. The goblin had the same wish; for, with one spring,he was up stairs and in the student's room, whom he found standingby the open window, and looking quite calmly at the fire, which wasraging at the house of a neighbor opposite. The goblin caught up thewonderful book which lay on the table, and popped it into his red cap,which he held tightly with both hands. The greatest treasure in thehouse was saved; and he ran away with it to the roof, and seatedhimself on the chimney. The flames of the burning house 